OceanofPDF.com 18

‘Der Manstein Kommt!’

Snow began to fall heavily at the end of the ɹrst week of December. Drifts ɹlled balkas, forcing those who lived in caves excavated from their sides to dig their way out. There was little fuel for any vehicles, and the horses pulling ration carts were so starved that their strength had to be spared on the smallest hills. Chaplain Altmann of the 113th Infantry Division, after hitching a ride on one, recorded: ‘I can’t remain seated, because the horse is so ill-nourished that he cannot stand the slightest strain.’

Altmann was above all struck by the pathetic youth of soldiers in the regiment he was visiting. Their ɹrst question was utterly predictable: ‘When are we going to get more to eat?’ He also noted that although it was only the second week of December, ‘already their wretched bunkers in the middle of this treeless steppe have Christmas decorations’. At battalion headquarters, he received a telephone call warning him of an unChristmas-like duty. ‘Tomorrow morning at dawn, execution of a German soldier (nineteen-year-old, self-inɻicted wound).’

Although all soldiers suʃered badly from hunger, most still had no idea of the size of the supply problem facing the Sixth Army. Hitler, when ordering Paulus to stay in place, had promised that more than one hundred Junkers 52 transport aircraft would be delivering supplies, yet during the air-bridge’s ɹrst week of operations from 23 November the airlift did not even average thirty ɻights a day. Twenty-two transport planes were lost through enemy action and crashes on 24 November, and another nine were shot down the following day. Heinkel 11 is had to be taken oʃ bombing missions in a desperate attempt to make up the losses. Richthofen rang Jeschonnek three times in an attempt to convince him that they lacked the aircraft to supply the Sixth Army by air. Goering could not be contacted. He had left for Paris.

The airlift did not provide anything like the bare minimum of 300 tons a day promised. Just 350 tons arrived during the course of the whole week. Out of this 350 tons, there were only 14 tons of food for a ration strength by then reduced to 275,000. Three-quarters of the total load consisted of fuel, of which part was for the Luftwaʃe’s own aircraft based at Pitomnik to protect the transport aircraft from Russian ɹghters. The Pitomnik-based Messerschmitts, however, were now facing fearsome odds as well as often appalling ɻying conditions. One captured pilot told his NKVD interrogator how, ɻying out of Pitomnik as escort, his Me-109 had been cut oʃ and attacked by six Russian ɹghters.

In the second week up to 6 December, 512 tons (still less than a quarter of the minimum) arrived, delivered by an average of 44 transport aircraft a day. Only 24 tons were food supplies. More and more draught animals had to be slaughtered to make up the shortage. Soldiers saw their rations diminishing rapidly, but they convinced themselves that the situation would not last. They admired the bravery of the Luftwaʃe crews and developed a great aʃection for ‘Tante Ju’ – the Junkers trimotors ɻying out wounded comrades and taking their letters home to Germany. ‘I’m well and healthy,’ they wrote in December, reassuring their families at home. ‘Nothing worse can happen,’ was another constant refrain. ‘Don’t be worried for me, I’ll soon be home safe and sound.’ They still hoped for a Christmas miracle.

Stalin, meanwhile, had been hoping for a second decisive blow, almost immediately after the encirclement of the Sixth Army. Operation Uranus had been seen at the Stavka as the ɹrst part of a master strategy. The second, and most ambitious phase, would be Operation Saturn. This called for a sudden oʃensive by the armies of South-West and Voronezh Fronts, smashing through the Italian Eighth Army to advance south to Rostov. The idea was to cut oʃ the rest of Army Group Don and trap the First Panzer and the Seventeenth Armies in the Caucasus.

Even before Sixth Army started to dig in on the steppe between the Don and the Volga, Vasilevsky had been discussing the next stage with the commanders of the South-West and Voronezh Fronts. He submitted his initial project to Stalin on the night of 26 November. The estimated start date for Saturn, allowing for redeployment and reinforcement, was 10 December. Stalin agreed, and told him to proceed. A more immediate preoccupation, however, had to be addressed ɹrst. This was the question of how Manstein would react to save the Sixth Army.

Stalin began to suʃer from a characteristic bout of impatience. He wanted everything to happen at once – both Operation Saturn and the rapid destruction of the Sixth Army. He had already given orders for the 2nd Guards Army, the most powerful force in the Red Army, to deploy west of Stalingrad, ready for the attack on Rostov. But as Vasilevsky discovered in the ɹrst week of December, even with seven Soviet armies deployed against them, Paulus’s divisions were going to be much more diɽcult to destroy than they had imagined.

On 28 November, Stalin asked Zhukov for an assessment of enemy intentions. Zhukov sent his report the next day. ‘The trapped German forces are not likely to try to break out without help from a relief force from the direction of Nizhne-Chirskaya and Kotelnikovo,’ he wrote. His predictions proved accurate, but a close study of the situation showed that this was the only practicable choice. After sending his answer to Stalin, Zhukov discussed the situation with Vasilevsky, who had now been told by Stalin to focus his attention entirely on the reduction of the Sixth Army. The two generals privately agreed that they would probably have to postpone Operation Saturn and instead consider an Operation Little Saturn. The plan would be to crash into the rear and left ɻank of Manstein’s Army Group Don. This would bring any drive to relieve Stalingrad to an abrupt halt.

* OceanofPDF.com OceanofPDF.com Manstein’s plan to rescue the Sixth Army – Operation Winter Storm – was developed in full consultation with Führer headquarters. (See Map 5.) It aimed to break through to the Sixth Army and establish a corridor to keep it supplied and reinforced, so that, according to Hitler’s order, it could maintain its ‘cornerstone’ position on the Volga, ‘with regard to operations in 1943’. Manstein, however, who knew that Sixth Army could not survive the winter there, instructed his headquarters to draw up a further plan in the event of Hitler’s seeing sense. This would include the subsequent breakout of Sixth Army, in the event of a successful ɹrst phase, and its physical reincorporation in Army Group Don. This second plan was given the name Operation Thunderclap.

Winter Storm, as Zhukov had predicted, was originally planned as a two-pronged attack. One thrust would come from the area of Kotelnikovo, well to the south, and around a hundred miles from the Sixth Army. The other would start from the Chir front west of the Don, which was little more than forty miles from the edge of the Kessel, but the continuing attacks of Romanenko’s 5th Tank Army against the German detachments along the river Chir ruled out that start-line. This left only the LVII Panzer Corps round Kotelnikovo, supported by the rest of Hoth’s very mixed Fourth Panzer Army, to relieve Paulus’s trapped divisions.

The LVII Panzer Corps, commanded by General Friedrich Kirchner, had been weak at ɹrst. It consisted of two Romanian cavalry divisions and the 23rd Panzer Division, which mustered no more than thirty serviceable tanks. The 6th Panzer Division, arriving from France, was a vastly more powerful formation, but its members hardly received an encouraging impression. The Austrian divisional commander, General Erhard Raus, was summoned to Manstein’s royal carriage in Kharkov station on 24 November, where the ɹeld marshal briefed him. ‘He described the situation in very sombre terms,’ recorded Raus. Three days later, when the ɹrst trainload of Raus’s division steamed into Kotelnikovo station to unload, his troops were greeted by ‘a hail of shells’ from Soviet batteries. ‘As quick as lightning, the panzer grenadiers jumped from their wagons. But already the enemy was attacking the station with their battlecries of “Urrah!”’

Hoth was indeed glad to see the 6th Panzer Division. It had been reɹtted in Brittany, and was fully up to strength, with 160 longbarrelled Panzer Mark IVs and forty assault guns. The division soon had a chance to try out its new equipment. On 3 December, it became involved in a wild battle with the Soviet 4th Cavalry Corps near the village of Pakhlebin, seven miles north-west of Kotelnikovo. The panzer crews, exhilarated as their tank tracks crunched through the crust of ice in their outɻanking armoured charge, cut oʃ the 81st Cavalry Division, inɻicting heavy losses. General Raus, pleased with the result, referred to the engagement as ‘the Cannae of Pakhlebin’. The arrival of Raus’s division conɹrmed Yeremenko’s suspicions that the Germans were about to strike north-eastwards from Kotelnikovo, yet Stalin still refused to transfer reserves to the threatened sector.

Also on 3 December, Hoth produced his proposal for ‘Winter Storm’, which began: ‘Intention: Fourth Panzer Army relieves Sixth Army’, but valuable time was lost. The 17th Panzer Division, which was to complete his strike force, had been held back, on the orders of Führer headquarters, as a reserve behind the Italian Eighth Army. In the end it did not join Hoth’s force until four days after the operation had begun. Hitler nevertheless insisted that no more time should be wasted. He was also impatient to discover how the new Tiger tank, with its 88-mm gun, would perform. The very ɹrst battalion to be formed had been rushed to the Ostfront and added to Kirchner’s force. On the evening of 10 December, the commanders received the ‘Order for the Relief Attack to Stalingrad’.

On 12 December, after a brief artillery bombardment, Hoth’s panzers struck north. The German soldiers inside the Kessel listened eagerly to the distant sound of ɹghting. Conɹdence seemed boundless. Excited rumours ran round the Sixth Army. ‘Manstein is coming!’ soldiers said to each other, almost like the Easter greeting of the Orthodox Church. For Hitler loyalists, the distant guns were proof once more that the Führer always kept his word.

Hitler, however, had not the slightest intention of allowing the Sixth Army to break out. In his midday conference at the Wolfsschanze, he told Zeitzler that it was impossible to retreat from Stalingrad because this would involve sacriɹcing ‘the whole meaning of the campaign’ and argued that too much blood had been shed. As Kluge had warned Manstein, he was still obsessed with the events of the previous winter and his order to Army Group Centre to hold fast. ‘Once a unit has started to ɻee,’ he lectured the army chief of staʃ, ‘the bonds of law and order quickly disappear in the course of ɻight.’

The Soviet commanders did not expect Manstein’s oʃensive quite so soon. Yeremenko immediately feared for the 57th Army, which held the south-west corner of the Kessel. Vasilevsky was at 51st Army headquarters with Khrushchev on 12 December when the news of the German attack was received in a radio signal. He tried to ring Stalin in Moscow, but could not get through. Not wanting to waste a moment, he contacted General Rokossovsky, the commander of the Don Front, and told him that he wanted to transfer General Rodion Malinovsky’s 2nd Guards Army to the command of the Stalingrad Front to block Manstein’s oʃensive. Rokossovsky protested strongly, and to Vasilevsky’s dismay when he ɹnally got through to the Kremlin on the telephone that evening, Stalin was angry at what he thought was an attempt to force him into a decision. He refused to give an answer and forced Vasilevsky to spend a very anxious night.

In the meantime, Yeremenko had ordered the 4th Mechanized Corps and the 13th Tank Corps to block the headlong advance of the German armour. The 6th Panzer Division moved forward some thirty miles in the ɹrst twenty-four hours, crossing the river Aksay. Finally, after discussions in the Kremlin which lasted into the early hours of the next morning, and more telephone calls with Vasilevsky, Stalin agreed to the transfer of the 2nd Guards Army two days hence. On the second day of the oʃensive, 6th Panzer Division reached Verkhne-Kumsky. Rain poured down in what was to prove a brief thaw. On the high ground round this village began what General Raus described as ‘a gigantic wrestling-match’. This furious threeday ‘revolving battle’ became costly. It proved a success locally Hoth’s divisions and the Tiger tanks advanced to the line of the Myshkova, once 17th Panzer Division arrived and Richthofen threw in maximum air support – but events there soon proved irrelevant to the fortunes of the Sixth Army. They were being decided some 125 miles to the north-west.

Stalin quickly realized that Zhukov and Vasilevsky had been right. The most eʃective way to smash the whole attempt to relieve Paulus’s army was by blocking Hoth’s advance on the Myshkova, while delivering the decisive blow elsewhere. He agreed to the idea of adapting Operation Saturn. Orders were prepared on the ɹrst day of the ɹghting at Verkhne-Kumsky, instructing the commanders of the Voronezh and South-West Fronts to prepare to launch an amended version, known as Little Saturn. The plan was to smash through the Italian 8th Army into the rear of Army Group Don, rather than strike at Rostov. Their armies were to be ready to attack in three days’ time.

Yeremenko was still nervous. With Hoth’s Panzer Corps on the line of the Myshkova river, the 6th Panzer Division was less than forty miles from the edge of the Kessel, and the 2nd Guards Army, delayed by renewed blizzards, would not be fully in position to counter-attack before 19 December. He expected the Sixth Army’s panzer forces to break out from the south-west of the Kessel at any moment, but he did not know that Hitler still refused his permission, and that Paulus’s seventy remaining tanks had only enough fuel to advance a dozen miles.

Field Marshal von Manstein sent Major Eismann, his intelligence oɽcer, into the Kessel by air on 19 December. His mission, Manstein claimed later, was to brief Paulus and Schmidt to prepare the Sixth Army for Operation Thunderclap. Diʃerent versions and diʃerent interpretations of what was said at this meeting will never be resolved. It is, however, clear that Manstein still avoided taking the responsibility for disobeying Hitler. He would not give Paulus a clear lead, and refused – no doubt, for sound reasons of security – to ɻy into the Kessel to discuss the matter with him face to face. Yet Manstein must have known from the start that Paulus, a ɹrm believer in the chain of command, would never have broken out without a formal order from higher command. Manstein’s eʃorts in his memoirs to absolve himself from any blame for the fate of Sixth Army are curiously exaggerated, as well as unfair on Paulus. It would appear that he suʃered from an uneasy conscience, and yet nobody blamed him.

*

On 16 December, just four days into Hoth’s oʃensive, the 1st and 3rd Guards Armies, as well as the Soviet 6th Army further up the Don, attacked south. Slowed by thick, freezing mist, with their tank formations blundering into mineɹelds, the Soviet operation did not get oʃ to a good start. Within two days, however, the Italian Eighth Army had crumbled after some acts of ɹerce resistance. There was no reserve ready to counter-attack, now that the 17th Panzer Division had joined Hoth’s operation east of the Don, so the Soviet tank columns broke out southwards into open, snow-covered steppe. The great freeze in the region which began on 16 December did little to slow the brigades of T-34S rampaging in Army Group Don’s rear. Railway junctions and stations were captured just after wagons full of equipment had been set ablaze by German support troops before they ɻed.

The gravest threat to the Germans was the 150-mile advance of Major-General Vasily Mikhailovich Badanov’s 24th Tank Corps. On the afternoon of 23 December, it overran Skassirskaya, just to the north of Tatsinskaya, the main Junkers 52 base for Stalingrad. General Fiebig had received an order from Führer headquarters that his aircraft were not to abandon the airɹeld until it came under artillery ɹre. Nobody in Hitler’s entourage seems to have considered the possibility that an armoured column might arrive at the edge of the ɹeld and then open ɹre.

Fiebig and his oɽcers were furious. One could always recapture an airɹeld, but if the transport aircraft were lost, then so was the Sixth Army. They had no ground troops to defend ‘Tazi’, as the Luftwaʃe called it. All they could do was to divert seven ɻak guns to cover the road, and prepare all serviceable aircraft for take-oʃ in the early hours of the morning. There were so many that this did not prove easy. ‘Around the runway it looked like chaos,’ noted Richthofen’s chief of staʃ, who was present. ‘With engines running, one could hardly understand a single word.’ To make matters worse, there was a fairly thick mist, cloud was down to 150 feet and light snow was falling.

At 5.20 a.m., the ɹrst shells exploded. The bulk of the Soviet tanks had come across country, not up the road. Many pilots, because of the noise and chaos on the airɹeld, did not at ɹrst realize what was happening, even when two Junkers 52s caught ɹre. Fiebig himself gave the order over the radio, ‘Oʃ you go, head for Novocherkassk!’ The pilots did not waste time. ‘The ɻight from Tatsinskaya’ had started. Considering the earlier confusion, there was impressively little panic. The aircraft took oʃ in a steady stream, despite a mounting rate of casualties. For the Russian T-34s, it was like a shooting range at a fairground. Some of the Soviet tanks ɹred wildly as they advanced across the snow. One even rammed a Junkers trimotor taxiing into position for take-oʃ. The explosion and ɹreball consumed them both. Numerous other aircraft crashed into one another on the runway or were destroyed by gunɹre. Visibility was becoming worse by the minute, and the remaining aircraft had to negotiate burning wrecks to escape. Finally at 6.15 a.m., General Fiebig’s machine, one of the last to take oʃ, was airborne. Altogether 108 Ju-52 trimotors and 16 Ju-86 trainers were saved, but the loss of 72 aircraft represented roughly 10 per cent of the Luftwaʃe’s total transport ɻeet.

Badanov, after this bold raid, found himself cut oʃ for ɹve days, badly mauled and out of ammunition. Stalin was unstinting in his appreciation. The formation was retitled the 2nd Guards Tank Corps, and Badanov was the ɹrst to receive the new Order of Suvorov. Red Army propaganda claimed that his tanks had destroyed 431 aircraft in all, but this was a typically wild exaggeration. The important result, however, was that Tatsinskaya was never used for transport missions again. The Luftwaʃe had to move even further out to a completely makeshift airɹeld.

The outcome of Hoth’s rescue mission had already been decided. The threat to the left ɻank of Army Group Don, and the possibility of a breakthrough towards Rostov (apparently conɹrmed by the interrogation of the chief of staʃ of the 3rd Guards Army, who was captured on 20 December), forced Manstein to reconsider his whole position. The panzer divisions on the Myshkova were also receiving a heavy battering, with 6th Panzer Division losing 1,100 men in a single day. On the evening of 23 December, Hoth’s panzer corps received the order to pull back, without any explanation. ‘Right down to the most junior soldier it was absolutely clear’, wrote General Raus, ‘that this signiɹed defeat at Stalingrad. Although nobody yet knew the reasons behind the order, oɽcers and men had a strong inkling that something ugly must have happened.’

That same night, Paulus and Manstein discussed the position in a conference conducted via teleprinter. Manstein warned that the 4th Panzer Army had met heavy resistance and that the Italian troops on the northern ɻank had collapsed. Paulus asked whether he had ɹnally received permission for the Sixth Army to break out. Manstein replied that he still had not obtained agreement from supreme headquarters. He was sparing with the details. If Paulus had been given suɽcient information to update his operations map, he would have seen that the Sixth Army was beyond help.

On 16 December, a hard and bitter wind had begun to blow from the north-east. Everything was rimed in frost: telegraph lines, stunted trees, the debris of war. The ground froze so hard that footsteps began to have the ring of walking on metal. As night fell, following a vivid red sunset, the white landscape brieɻy turned an arctic blue. The Russian defenders of Stalingrad welcomed the cold as natural and healthy. ‘Yesterday and today winter really started here,’ a soldier wrote to his wife. ‘Good frosts. I live very well, but no letters from you.’

Nobody was happier than the members of Chuikov’s 62nd Army in Stalingrad itself, after ɹve weeks of listening to the terrible grinding of the ice ɻoes on the virtually unnavigable Volga, and subsisting oʃ the emergency reserve of twelve tons of chocolate and tiny supply drops by U-2 biplanes. The river ɹnally froze solid on the night of 16 December, when a mass of ice ɻoes crushed and stuck ɹrm. First a footway over the ice was made with planks. Then motor highways were constructed using branches and water poured over them, which froze and bound the surface. In the course of the next seven weeks, tracked vehicles, 18,000 lorries and 17,000 other vehicles crossed over. Any wounded could now be driven straight across the ice to the ɹeld hospital. Guns were later trundled across to the west bank, including a 122-mm howitzer which was needed to break the deadlock in the Red October works. On minimum elevation, it was used at short range to blast the main oɽce building, which the Germans had turned into a fortress.

Most fortunate of all for the 62nd Army, the shortage of shells for the German artillery meant that the constant shelling of Volga crossing points was no longer possible. The bank itself often oʃered a peaceful scene. It resembled an early frontier mining settlement, with makeshift huts and tarpaulin shelters over holes in the bank. As men split logs, or sawed wood, a regimental postman walked past in the frozen sunshine to headquarters with his leather mailbag, hoping for a mug of hot tea from the copper samovar. Others went by bearing thermos containers with hot food for the troops in forward positions. Soldiers could now walk back in batches over the ice to steam baths set up on the east side of the river, to return clean and deloused the next night.

On 19 December General Chuikov crossed to the east bank of the Volga for the ɹrst time since changing his headquarters in October. He crossed the ice on foot, and when he reached the far side, he apparently turned to gaze at the ruins which his army had held. Chuikov had come over for a party given by the commander of NKVD troops, Major-General Rogatin, in honour of the twentyfourth anniversary of the founding of the Special Department of the Cheka. Chuikov on his return, when very drunk, fell through a hole in the ice, and had to be ɹshed out of the freezing water. The commander of the 62nd Army nearly met an ignominious and anticlimactic end.

While the Russians welcomed the low temperatures, the doctors in Paulus’s army dreaded them, for several reasons. The resilience of their patients, both the sick and the wounded, declined. Frost in an open wound could rapidly prove lethal. The hardness of the ground when shells, Katyusha rockets and mortar bombs exploded, seemed to be the only explanation for the great increase in stomach wounds with which they were faced. And from the middle of December there was ‘a steadily increasing number of serious frostbite cases’. The feet were not just swollen and purple – a degree treated with ointment, a bandage and return to duty – but black and potentially gangrenous, often requiring rapid amputation.

As early as the second week of December, doctors had started to notice a more disturbing phenomenon. An increasing number of soldiers died suddenly ‘without having received a wound or suʃering from a diagnosable sickness’. Rations were indeed severely reduced, but for doctors, it still appeared to be far too early for cases of death by starvation. ‘The suspected causes’, wrote the pathologist entrusted with the inquiry, ‘included exposure, “exhaustion” [none of the approximately 600 doctors in the Kessel ventured to mention starvation] and above all a hitherto unidentiɹed disease.’

On 15 December, Dr Girgensohn, the Sixth Army pathologist then working in the hospital next to Tatsinskaya airɹeld, received the order to ɻy into the Kessel next day. ‘Unfortunately we don’t have a spare parachute for you,’ the pilot told him when he reported next morning at dawn, but they were forced to turn back. Finally, on 17 December, they reached the Kessel. The pilot told him they were over Pitomnik, and Girgensohn, peering through the small window, saw ‘in the white blanket of snow a brown cratered landscape’.

Girgensohn found General Doctor Renoldi, the chief medical oɽcer, in a railway carriage dug into the ground on the edge of the airɹeld. Renoldi pretended to know nothing about Girgensohn’s mission, because Dr Seggel, a specialist in internal medicine at Leipzig University, had requested his presence, and Renoldi, at that

stage, considered the issue exaggerated. * From Pitomnik, Girgensohn was taken to the army ɹeld hospital next to Gumrak station and also close to Paulus’s headquarters. His base was a wood-lined bunker, dug into the steep side of a balka. This accommodation was indeed ‘luxurious’, since it contained an iron stove and two double bunk beds with, to his astonishment, clean sheets. It was a great contrast to the nearby accommodation for the wounded, which largely consisted of unheated tents in temperatures down to minus twenty.

Girgensohn had preliminary discussions with divisional medical oɽcers, then travelled round the Kessel, carrying out post-mortems on the corpses of soldiers who had died from no obvious causes. (Such was the shortage of wood in this treeless waste that a fork or crossroads along the snowbound route was marked by the leg from a slaughtered horse stuck upright in a mound of snow. The relevant tactical sign and directional arrow were attached to the top of this gruesome signpost.) The autopsies had to be carried out in a variety of inconvenient places: tents, earth bunkers, peasant huts, even in railway wagons. The extreme cold had maintained the cadavers in good condition, but most were frozen solid. Thawing them out proved very diɽcult with the shortage of available fuel. An orderly had to spend the night turning the corpses stacked around a small cast-iron oven. On one occasion, he fell asleep, and the result was ‘a corpse frozen on one side and seared on the other’.

The cold was so bad that it was both diɽcult and painful for Girgensohn to pull on his rubber gloves. Each evening, he typed up the results by candlelight. In spite of such diɽculties, which included Soviet air attacks and artillery bombardments, Girgensohn managed to perform ɹfty autopsies by the end of the month. In exactly half of this sample, he found clear signs of death by starvation: atrophy of the heart and liver, a complete absence of fatty tissue, a severe shrinkage of muscle.

In an attempt to compensate for the low-calorie diet of bread and ‘Wasserzuppe’ with a few tiny bits of horsemeat, Army Group Don ɻew in small tins of meat paste with a high fat content, but this proved counter-productive. Quite often, when a sergeant was making his rounds of the sentry positions and a soldier said, ‘I’m ɹne, I’ll now have something to eat,’ and then consumed some of the high-fat meat paste, the man was dead by the time the sergeant made his next round. Death from starvation, Girgensohn observed, was ‘undramatisch’.

The highest proportion of cases of death by starvation occurred in the 113th Infantry Division. Here at least, Girgensohn discovered a clear explanation. The quartermaster of the division had cut rations before the encirclement to hoard them as a precaution against insuɽcient supplies during the autumn rains. As a result, the men were already undernourished by the second half of November. Then, after several divisions had lost all their supplies during the retreat, Sixth Army headquarters centralized all remaining supplies to share them out equally. Thus the quartermaster’s prudence backɹred badly against his division.

Girgensohn, who spent seven years in Russian labour camps after the surrender, never lost his interest in the subject. He has always vigorously disputed any suggestion of ‘stress illness’, both as a condition in itself, and as an explanation for many of the unexplained deaths, even though recent research, which has shown that rats deprived of sleep for three weeks will die, suggests that humans deprived of sleep burn out rapidly. The pattern of Russian night attacks and constant activity to allow no rest undoubtedly had a contributory eʃect, as he acknowledges. But his explanation, after all these years, is more complex. He became convinced that the combination of exhaustion, stress and cold gravely upset the metabolism of most soldiers. This meant that even if they received the equivalent of, say, 500 calories a day, their bodies absorbed only a fraction. Thus, one could say that Soviet tactics, combined with the weather conditions and food shortages, produced, or at least contributed to, an accelerated process of starvation.

Severe malnutrition also reduced a patient’s ability to survive infectious diseases, such as hepatitis and dysentery in the earlier period of the encirclement, and more serious diseases right at the end, particularly typhoid and typhus. Out in the steppe there was no water for washing bodies, let alone clothes, simply because there was not enough fuel to melt snow and ice. ‘There’s little new here,’ wrote a panzer grenadier lieutenant in the 29th Motorized Infantry Division. ‘Top of the list is the fact that every day we become more infested with lice. Lice are like the Russians. You kill one, ten new ones appear in its place.’ Lice would be the carriers for the epidemics which decimated the survivors of Stalingrad.

The immediate concerns of medical staʃ, however, still focused on weakness from lack of food. ‘Slowly, our brave ɹghters are starting to become decrepit,’ wrote an assistant doctor. He went on to describe an amputation at the thigh which he performed by torchlight in a dugout without any form of anaesthetic. ‘One is apathetic towards everything and can only think about food.’

The need of German soldiers for hope was mixed with a hatred for the Bolshevik enemy and a longing for revenge. In a state of what was called ‘Kesselfever’, they dreamed of an SS Panzer Corps smashing through the encircling Russian armies to rescue them, thus turning the tables in a great, unexpected victory. They tended to be the ones who still listened to Goebbels’s speeches. Many kept up their spirits by singing the Sixth Army’s song, Das Wolgalied, to the tune by Franz Lehár: ‘There stands a soldier on the Volga shore, keeping watch there for his Fatherland’.

The operational propaganda department at Don Front headquarters, using its German Communist assistants, decided to exploit the Landser’s fondness for songs. They broadcast from their loudspeaker vans an old favourite, which in present circumstances had a cruel twist: ‘In the homeland, in the homeland, there awaits a warm reunion!’ The German Communists under NKVD supervision consisted of Walter Ulbricht (later the East German president), the poet Erich Weinert, the writer Willi Bredel and a handful of German prisoners – four oɽcers and a soldier – who had been recruited to the anti-Nazi cause. They taught ‘criers’, who were Red Army men chosen to crawl forward to dead ground in front of German lines and shout slogans and items of news through megaphones. Few of them knew any German, and most were killed.

The main activity of the propaganda detachment was to prepare 20- to 30-minute programmes on a gramophone record, with music, poems, songs and propaganda (especially the news of the breakthrough on the Italian Army’s front). The programme was then played on a wind-up gramophone, and broadcast by the loudspeakers, either mounted on the van, or sometimes pushed forwards on sledges with a wire running back. Most propaganda broadcasts of this sort immediately attracted German mortar ɹre, on the order of oɽcers afraid that their men might listen. But during December, the response became weaker owing to the shortage of munitions.

Diʃerent sound tricks were adopted, such as ‘the monotonous ticking of a clock’ followed by the claim that one German died every seven seconds on the Eastern Front. The ‘crackling sound of the propaganda voice’ then intoned: ‘Stalingrad, mass grave of Hitler’s army!’ and the deathly tango dance music would start up again across the empty frozen steppe. As an extra sonic twist, the heartstopping shriek of a real Katyusha rocket would sometimes follow from a ‘Stalin organ’ launcher.

Russian leaɻets had greatly improved, now that they were written by Germans. Prisoner interrogations by the 7th Department conɹrmed that ‘the ones with the most eʃect are those which talk about home, wives, family and children’. ‘Soldiers eagerly read Russian leaɻets even though they don’t believe them,’ admitted one German prisoner. Some ‘cried when they saw a leaɻet representing the corpse of a German soldier and an infant crying over it. On the other side were simple verses by the writer Erich Weinert.’ The prisoner had no idea that Weinert, who had specially written the poem, ‘Think of Your Child!’, was very close by, attached to Don Front headquarters.

Perhaps the most eʃective piece of propaganda was to persuade German soldiers that they would not be shot on capture. Many of their oɽcers had relied on the argument that surrender was out of the question because the Russians would kill them. One leaɻet ended with a declaration by Stalin which began to convince even junior commanders that Soviet policy had changed: ‘“If German soldiers and oɽcers give themselves up, the Red Army must take them prisoner and spare their lives.” (From Order No. 55 by the People’s Commissar for Defence, J. Stalin.)’

The ɹrst encirclement of a large German army, trapped far from home, ordered to stay put and ɹnally abandoned to its fate, has naturally created an intense debate over the years. Many German participants and historians have blamed Paulus for not having disobeyed orders, and broken out. Yet if anybody was in a position to give Paulus, who was deprived of vital information, a lead in the matter, it should have been his immediate superior, Field Marshal von Manstein.

‘Can one serve two masters?’ Strecker noted when Hitler rejected Operation Thunderclap, the breakout plan to follow Operation Winter Storm. But the German Army only had a single master. The servile record since 1933 of most senior oɽcers had left it both dishonoured and politically impotent. In fact, the disaster and humiliation of Stalingrad were the price which the army had to pay for its hubristic years of privilege and prestige under the National Socialist umbrella. There was no choice of master, short of joining the group round Henning von Tresckow and Stauʃenberg.

Much time has been spent debating whether a breakout was feasible in the second half of December, yet even panzer commanders acknowledged that ‘the chances of a successful breakout diminished with every week’. The infantry had even fewer illusions. ‘We survivors’, a corporal wrote home, ‘can hardly keep going owing to hunger and weakness.’ Dr Alois Beck, quite rightly, disputed the ‘legend’ that ‘a breakout would have succeeded’. The Russians would have shot the ‘half-frozen soldiers down like hares’, because the men in their weakened state could not have waded through over a foot of snow, with its crust of ice on the surface, carrying weapons and ammunition. ‘Every step was exhausting,’ observed a staʃ oɽcer from Sixth Army headquarters. ‘It would have been like the Berezina.’

The whole ‘Breakout or Defence’ debate is thus a purely academic diversion from the real issues. In fact one suspects that the formidably intelligent Manstein recognized this at the time. He made a great play of sending Major Eismann, his intelligence oɽcer, into the Kessel on 19 December to prepare the Sixth Army for Operation Thunderclap. Yet Manstein knew by then that Hitler, who had again reaɽrmed his determination not to move from the Volga, would never change his mind.

In any case, Manstein must have realized by then that the relief attempt was doomed. Hoth’s panzer divisions were being fought to a standstill on the Myshkova, with heavy casualties, even before the bulk of Malinovsky’s 2nd Guards Army had deployed. And Manstein, who had kept himself well informed of developments within the Kessel and the state of the troops, must have realized that Paulus’s men could never have walked, let alone fought, for between forty and sixty miles through the blizzards and deep frosts. The Sixth Army, with fewer than seventy under-supplied tanks, stood no chance of breaking through the 57th Army. Most important of all, Manstein knew by 19 December that Operation Little Saturn, with three Soviet armies breaking through into his rear, was changing the whole position irrevocably.

Quite simply, Manstein sensed that, in the sight of history and the German Army, he had to be seen to make every eʃort, even if he believed, quite correctly, that the Sixth Army’s only chance of saving itself had expired almost a month earlier. His apparently uneasy conscience after the event must have been due to the fact that, with Hitler’s refusal to withdraw from the Caucasus, he had needed the Sixth Army to tie down the seven Soviet armies surrounding it. If Paulus had attempted a breakout so few of his men would have survived, and in such a pitiable condition, that they would have been of no use to him in the moment of crisis.

OceanofPDF.com 19

‘Christmas in the German Way’

The argument about breaking out of the Kessel in the second half of December also overlooked one curiously important psychological factor. Christmas was coming. No formation in the Wehrmacht was more preoccupied with the subject than the beleaguered Sixth Army. The quite extraordinary eʃorts devoted to its observance in bunkers below the steppe hardly indicated an impatience to break out. Lethargy from malnutrition combined with escapist daydreaming no doubt played a part, and probably so did the ‘Fortress’ mentality which Hitler helped to cultivate. But none of these entirely explain the almost obsessive emotional focus which the prospect of Christmas held for those trapped so far from home.

Preparations began well before Hoth’s panzer divisions advanced north to the Myshkova river, and never seem to have slackened, even when soldiers became excited by the sound of approaching gunɹre. From quite early in the month, men started to put aside tiny amounts of food, not in preparation for a breakout across the snow, but for a Christmas feast or for gifts. A unit in 297th Infantry Division slaughtered a packhorse early so as to make ‘horse sausage’ as Christmas presents. Advent crowns were fashioned from tawny steppe grass instead of evergreen, and little Christmas trees were carved out of wood in desperate attempts to make it ‘just like at home’.

The sentimentality was by no means restricted to soldiers. General Edler von Daniels decorated his newly dug bunker with a Christmas tree and underneath a cradle with a snapshot of his ‘Kesselbaby’, born soon after their encirclement. He wrote to his young wife describing his plans to celebrate Christmas Eve ‘in the German way, although in far-oʃ Russia’. The military group had clearly become the surrogate family. ‘Each man sought to bring a little joy to another,’ he wrote after visiting his men in their bunkers. ‘It was really uplifting to experience this true comradeship of the front line.’ One festive banner proclaimed ‘Comradeship through Blood and Iron’, which, however appropriate to the circumstances, rather missed the message of Christmas.

One person who certainly did not miss the message was Kurt Reuber, the doctor in the 16th Panzer Division. The thirty-six-yearold Reuber, a theologian and friend of Albert Schweitzer, was also a gifted amateur artist. He converted his bunker in the steppe northwest of Stalingrad into a studio and began to draw on the back of a captured Russian map – the only large piece of paper to be found. This work, which today hangs in the Kaiser Wilhelm memorial church in Berlin, is the ‘Fortress Madonna’, an embracing, protective, almost womb-like mother and child, joined with the words of St John the Evangelist: ‘Light, Life, Love’. When the drawing was ɹnished, Reuber pinned it up in the bunker. Everyone who entered, halted and stared. Many began to cry. To Reuber’s slight embarrassment – no artist could have been more modest about his own gifts – his bunker became something of a shrine.

There can be little doubt about the genuine and spontaneous generosity of that Christmas. A lieutenant gave out the last of his cigarettes, writing paper and bread as presents for his men. ‘I myself had nothing,’ he wrote home, ‘and yet it was one of my most beautiful Christmases and I will never forget it.’ As well as giving their cigarette ration, men even gave their bread, which they sorely needed. Others laboriously carved equipment racks for each other.

On Christmas Eve, Reuber’s pianist battalion commander gave his last bottle of sparkling wine to the soldiers in the sickbay, but just after all the mugs were ɹlled, four bombs exploded outside. Everyone ɻung themselves to the ɻoor, spilling all the Sekt. The medical oɽcer grabbed his ɹrst-aid bag and ran from the bunker to see to the casualties – one killed and three wounded. The dead man had been singing the Christmas carol ‘O du fröhliche’. The incident, not surprisingly, put an end to their celebrations. In any case, both the 16th Panzer and the 6oth Motorized Infantry Division soon found themselves under full attack in the early hours of Christmas morning.

The traditional, and favourite, song that night was ‘Stille Nacht, heilige Nacht’, which soldiers sang ‘with husky voices’ in bunkers by the light of hoarded candle stubs. There were many stiɻed sobs as men thought of their families at home. General Strecker was clearly moved when he made a tour of front-line positions. ‘It is a “Stille Nacht” amid the turmoil of war… A Christmas that shows the true brotherhood of soldiers.’ Visits by senior oɽcers were also appreciated for their accompanying beneɹts. An NCO in a panzer division recorded that ‘the divisional commander gave us a swig from his bottle and a bar of chocolate’.

In positions which were not attacked, men crowded into a bunker which had a wireless to hear ‘the Christmas broadcast of Grossdeutsche Rundfunk’. To their astonishment, they heard a voice announce: ‘This is Stalingrad!’, answered by a choir singing ‘Stille Nacht, heilige Nacht, supposedly on the Volga front. Some men accepted the deception as necessary in the circumstances, others were deeply angered. They felt it was tricking their families and the German people as a whole. Goebbels had already proclaimed that this should be a ‘German Christmas’, a deɹnition intended to convey notions of duty and austerity, and perhaps already a way of preparing the nation for news of the tragedy of Stalingrad.

At seven o’clock on Christmas morning, the Sixth Army war diary recorded: ‘No supply ɻights arrived in the last forty-eight hours [a slight exaggeration]. Supplies and fuel coming to an end.’ Later that day, Paulus sent a warning signal to Army Group Don to be passed back to General Zeitzler. ‘If we do not receive increased rates of supplies in the next few days, we must expect a greatly increased death rate through exhaustion.’

Although they realized that the snowstorms of the previous day must have hindered ɻying, they had not been informed that Badanov’s tanks had stormed on to Tatsinskaya airɹeld the previous morning. Manstein’s headquarters did not even pass on the news that the Soviet counter-attack with four armies against Hoth’s panzer divisions on the Myshkova river had been launched. When 108 tons of supplies ɹnally arrived on 26 December, Sixth Army headquarters discovered that they had been sent ten tons of sweets for Christmas, but no fuel.

Most men, when they had the opportunity, sat apart to write a Christmas letter home in which they expressed their longing. ‘In our hearts we all keep hoping’, wrote a doctor with the 44th Infantry Division, ‘that everything will change.’ He spoke for many, but the better-informed commander-in-chief of the Sixth Army was not among them. ‘Christmas naturally was not very joyful,’ Paulus wrote to his wife a few days later. ‘At such moments, festivities are better avoided… One should not, I believe, expect too much from luck.’

Not surprisingly, the contrast between German and Russian letters home during the Christmas period becomes even more marked than usual. While German letters tended to be sentimental, aching for home and family, the Russian letters that have survived clearly reveal an inexorable logic that the Motherland took priority. ‘Darling!’ wrote a soldier to his wife on Christmas Eve. ‘We are pushing the serpents back to where they came from. Our successful advance brings our next meeting closer.’ ‘Hello Mariya,’ wrote a soldier called Kolya. ‘I’ve been ɹghting here for three months defending our beautiful [deleted by censor]. We have started pressing the enemy strongly. Now we have encircled the Germans. Every week a few thousand are taken prisoner and several thousand are destroyed on the ɹeld of battle. There are just the most stubborn SS soldiers left. They have fortiɹed themselves in bunkers and shoot from them. And now I’m going to blow up one of those bunkers. Goodbye. Kolya.’

The temperature on Christmas Day fell to minus twenty-ɹve degrees. The water in shell holes, however deep, was frozen solid. Flurries of snow hid much of the squalor in the balkas. Chaplains held ɹeld mass or communion in the snow to the sound of tarpaulins and tent canvas ɻapping and cracking in the wind, with half circles of men round a makeshift altar. In some cases, spiritual comfort and ideological justiɹcation became confused, as when Christian Germany was contrasted with godless Russia.

Even within the Kessel, Christmas did not prove entirely a season of goodwill. Dr Renoldi, the Sixth Army’s surgeon-general, forbade the evacuation by air of frostbite casualties, on the grounds that their injuries might have been self-inɻicted to avoid combat. And worst of all, virtually no food, apart from some rotting corn from the Stalingrad grain elevator, had been given to the 3,500 Russian prisoners of war in the camps at Voroponovo and Gumrak, because they did not feature on any ration strength. This partly bureaucratic atrocity led to a death rate of twenty a day by Christmas, and it soon escalated dramatically. The quartermaster responsible for feeding them claimed that typhus was the cause, but when an oɽcer from Sixth Army headquarters asked whether there had been deaths from undernourishment, he was evasive. ‘After reɻecting for a moment, he denied it,’ wrote the oɽcer. ‘I knew what he meant. Among our troops one was beginning to see similar things.’ But linking their fate with that of German soldiers was a worse evasion. The inmates had no choice – they could not surrender. Even when desperate prisoners began to resort to cannibalism, nothing was done to improve their conditions, because that meant ‘taking food from German soldiers’.

Christmas night was ‘a beautiful starry night’ and the temperature fell even further. Fighting, however, continued the next morning in the north-eastern sector of the Kessel defended by 16th Panzer Division and 60th Motorized Infantry Division. ‘Thus a dozen of our units’, reported the latter’s divisional chaplain, ‘were sent out to counterattack in icy winds and thirty-ɹve degrees of frost.’ The two divisions, despite the terrible conditions and shortages of ammunition, managed to destroy some seventy tanks.

On that same morning of 26 December, Paulus sent another signal to Manstein, which began: ‘Bloody losses, cold and insuɽcient supplies have reduced ɹghting strength of divisions severely.’ He warned that if the Russians brought back their forces ɹghting Hoth’s divisions, and redeployed them against the Sixth Army, ‘it would not be possible to withstand them for long’.

An unexpected opportunity then arose. General Hube, the commander of XIV Panzer Corps, received an order to ɻy out of the Kessel on 28 December to Manstein’s headquarters at Novocherkassk. An aircraft would take him on to East Prussia to receive the Swords to his Knight’s Cross with Oak Leaves from the Führer in person. Paulus told Schmidt to give him ‘all the necessary documents’ on all matters from fuel levels to shortages of medical equipment. The hopes of generals and staʃ oɽcers leaped at the news of his visit to Rastenburg. Hube, the blunt, one-armed veteran, was one of the few generals whom the Führer respected. They still could not believe ‘that Hitler would abandon the Sixth Army’.

Hitler had no doubt convinced himself that he was doing everything to save the Sixth Army, but his grasp of reality had not improved. That day his headquarters signalled to Army Group Don, promising that in spite of the bad transport situation, it would be reinforced with ‘372 tanks and assault guns’. Manstein knew that this was wishful thinking.

In the city of Stalingrad, meanwhile, the remnants of Seydlitz’s divisions were on the defensive. They had to conserve ammunition to repel attacks. They sheltered deep in cellars and bunkers, for warmth as well as safety from the Soviet artillery. ‘There they sit like hairy savages in stone-age caves,’ wrote Grossman, ‘devouring horseɻesh in smoke and gloom, amidst the ruins of a beautiful city that they have destroyed.’

The phrase ‘strong enemy storm troop activity’ appeared frequently in the Sixth Army war diary. Hans Urban, a twenty-eightyear-old police-station sergeant from Darmstadt, serving with the Hessian 389th Infantry Division, later provided a detailed report of this ɹghting in northern Stalingrad at the end of December.

The enemy used to attack at dawn and at dusk, after a heavy artillery and mortar preparation. If they captured two or three bunkers from us, we would try to get them back later. On 30 December, after many of these attacks, I was ordered to take my rapid-ɹre group forward. My nine men with their machine-guns were able to hold oʃ the next attack by about 300 men from Spartakovka. The twenty infantrymen left on this sector were so exhausted from all the attacks that they could not oʃer much help. Most were ready to abandon their positions. I had with my two machineguns no ɹeld of ɹre. The enemy were able to make use of the terrain and the ruins. We had to let the Russians get to within twenty yards before opening rapid ɹre. At least twenty-two were left dead in front of our positions. The surviving Russians tried to ɻush us out with grenades. The Russians attacked again on the same sector at daybreak on New Year’s morning with three companies. It’s hard to make an accurate estimate because they were shooting from holes in the ground, from behind collapsed walls or piles of rubble. We got them in a cross-ɹre from the two machineguns, and they suʃered heavy casualties. A mortarman was hit, and although I’d never trained with the weapon, we were able to use their own ammunition against them. After it was over, we were so weak and exhausted and there were so many dead lying around in the open frozen stiʃ, that we could not even bury our own comrades.

Paulus, in contrast to his strongly pessimistic signals to Army Group Don and the letter to his wife, signed a stirring New Year message to the Sixth Army: ‘Our will for victory is unbroken and the New Year will certainly bring our release! When this will be, I cannot yet say. The Führer has, however, never gone back on his word, and this time will be no diʃerent.’ Thanks to Hitler’s insistence on time zones, the Russian New Year arrived two hours earlier than the German. General Edler von Daniels’s card game of ‘Doppelknopf’ was interrupted at ten o’clock by ‘a powerful ɹrework display’, as the Soviet besiegers ɹred in their ‘New Year greeting’.

Daniels appears to have been in a good mood at this time. He had just been promoted to Lieutenant-General and awarded the Knight’s Cross. Then, as a New Year’s present from Paulus, he unexpectedly received a bottle of Veuve-Cliquot ‘Schampus’. Several of the Stalingrad generals still seemed to be almost more preoccupied with decorations and promotions than with the fate of the Sixth Army.

When German midnight arrived, only star shells were ɹred. High-explosive rounds could not be wasted. The very last bottles were opened in the Kessel for the toast: ‘Prosit Neujahr!’ Soviet divisions, on the other hand, suʃered few restrictions on ammunition and alcohol. ‘Celebrating the New Year was good,’ wrote Viktor Barsov, in the marine infantry. ‘I drank 250 grams of vodka that night. The food wasn’t bad. In the morning to avoid a headache I drank 200 grams more.’

German soldiers tried to make light of their misfortunes, with the idea that everything would change for the better with the passing of the old year. ‘Dear Parents, I’m all right,’ wrote one soldier. ‘Unfortunately, I again have to go on sentry tonight. I hope that in this New Year of 1943, I won’t have to survive as many disappointments as in 1942.’

An almost obsessive optimism was produced by Hitler’s New Year message to Paulus and the Sixth Army. Only the more sceptical spotted that the text did not constitute a ɹrm guarantee. ‘In the name of the whole German people, I send you and your valiant army the heartiest good wishes for the New Year. The hardness of your perilous position is known to me. The heroic stand of your troops has my highest respect. You and your soldiers, however, should enter the New Year with the unshakeable conɹdence that I and the whole German Wehrmacht will do everything in our power to relieve the defenders of Stalingrad and that with your staunchness will come the most glorious feat in the history of German arms. Adolf Hitler.’

‘Mein Führer!’ Paulus replied immediately. ‘Your conɹdent words on the New Year were greeted here with great enthusiasm. We will justify your trust. You can be certain that we – from the oldest general to the youngest grenadier – will hold out, inspired with a fanatical will, and contribute our share to ɹnal victory. Paulus.’ New Year letters from many soldiers in the Kessel reɻected a new mood of determination. ‘We’re not letting our spirits sink, instead we believe in the word of the Führer,’ wrote a captain. ‘We are maintaining a ɹrm trust in the Führer, unshakeable until ɹnal victory,’ wrote an ΝCO. ‘The Führer knows our worries and needs,’ wrote a soldier, ‘he will always – and I’m certain of this – try to help us as quickly as possible.’ Even a sceptical general like Strecker seems to have been aʃected. ‘New hope arises,’ he wrote, ‘and there is some optimism about the present and immediate future.’

Paulus, on the other hand, was concerned at this time by the growing success of Soviet propaganda. The 7th Department at Don Front headquarters in charge of ‘operational propaganda’ had followed up their identiɹcation of 44th Infantry Division and General Edler von Daniels’s 376th Infantry Division as the formations on which they should concentrate their eʃorts.

Early on the morning of 3 January, Paulus went to the Austrian 44th Infantry Division, ‘following radio broadcasts by prisoners from the 44th Infantry Division’. They had spoken on the shortages of food and ammunition and about the heavy casualties. ‘The commander-in-chief,’ stated the Sixth Army report, ‘wanted warnings to be given about the consequences of partaking in such broadcasts. Any soldiers who did so should realize that their names would be known, and they would face court martial.’ During Paulus’s meeting with General Deboi, the divisional commander, there was yet another ‘heavy attack with tanks’.

The very next morning, Paulus visited the Romanian commander in the ‘Fortress area’, whose soldiers had suʃered serious frostbite casualties owing to clothing shortages, ‘above all boots, trousers and socks’. The rising number of desertions prompted Paulus to conclude that: ‘Counter-propaganda is necessary against Russian leaɻets printed in Romanian.’

Battalions and companies were so weak that they had become meaningless designations. Out of over 150,000 soldiers left in the Kessel, less than one in ɹve were front-line troops. Many companies were down to a dozen men ɹt for duty. Fragments of units were therefore increasingly amalgamated into battle groups. The surviving panzer grenadiers of Sergeant-Major Wallrawe’s company found themselves mixed ‘with Luftwaʃe companies and Cossack platoons’ and sent to defend a position near Karpovka. It was an unfortunate spot to be sent to. A glance at the map indicated that the ‘nose’ which formed the south-western extremity of the Kessel would be the Russians’ ɹrst objective when they decided to ɹnish oʃ the Sixth Army.

There were a few days of comparatively mild, wet weather at the very start of the year. Russian soldiers hated the thaw. ‘I don’t like the weather in Stalingrad’, wrote Barsov in the marine infantry. ‘It changes often and this makes the riɻes go rusty. When it becomes warmer, the snow starts to fall. Everything becomes moist. Valenki[felt snow-boots] become soaking wet and we don’t get much chance to dry things.’ He and his comrades were, no doubt, happier on 5 January, when the temperature dropped to minus thirty-ɹve degrees.

Soviet forces adopted a deliberate tactic to exploit their superiority in winter equipment. ‘The Russians began with probing attacks’, wrote a Luftwaʃe liaison oɽcer. ‘If they breached the line, none of our men were in a position to dig new ɹre trenches. The men were physically too weak owing to lack of food, and the ground was frozen rock-hard.’ Stranded on the open steppe, even more would die. On 6 January, Paulus signalled to General Zeitzler: ‘Army starving and frozen, have no ammunition and cannot move tanks any more.’ The same day, Hitler awarded General Schmidt the Knight’s Cross of the Iron Cross. Now that the fate of the Sixth Army was certain, Soviet journalists were brought to Don Front headquarters at Zavarykino. A delegation of Soviet writers came down from the capital to visit the 173rd Riɻe Division, which had been raised from the Kievsky district of Moscow, and contained many intellectuals. ‘From the command post of 65th Army, writers Aleksandr Korneychuk and Wanda Vasilevskaya’ watched the division attack the Kazachy Kurgan, a Tartar burial mound on the north-west of the Kessel.

Even before Hoth’s rescue attempt had been crushed on the Myshkova river, Stalin was harrying his generals to produce plans for the annihilation of the Sixth Army. On the morning of 19 December, he had telephoned Voronov, the Stavka representative overseeing Operation Little Saturn, and told him to move to Don Front headquarters. Voronov installed himself close to Rokossovsky’s ‘residenz’, spread across the adjoining villages of Zavarykino and Medvedevo, where the accommodation for each general, or department, consisted of a ‘ɹve-walled’ peasant izba, a log cabin with a dividing wall down the middle. American Willys staʃ cars, with Soviet markings, lurched in and out of the frozen ruts, taking generals oʃ on tours of inspection to galvanize subordinate commanders in their eʃorts.

Voronov rapidly assembled a planning staʃ to study the options. He insisted, despite Stalin’s insistence on having the results in two days, on ɹrst inspecting the terrain for himself. His visit to 57th Army headquarters took place on a clear day. He observed a group of Junkers transports that appeared overhead at about 9,000 feet without a ɹghter escort. The Russian anti-aircraft batteries grouped in the area opened ɹre too late; Soviet ɹghters also arrived too late to intercept. Not a single Junkers had been brought down. Voronov was even more furious when he discovered how little coordination there was between ground observers, anti-aircraft batteries and the ɹghter squadrons. The major-general in charge of anti-aircraft operations was terrorized into feverish activity.

Back at Zavarykino, Voronov again examined the ɹgures. In spite of the strong German resistance put up early in December, Colonel I. V. Vinogradov, the chief intelligence oɽcer of the Don Front, had not greatly revised his estimate of soldiers trapped in the Kessel. He now put them at 86,000, when asked to be precise. It was a ɹgure which was to embarrass Red Army intelligence, especially when their NKVD rivals made sarcastic allusions later.

The draft plan for Operation Ring was at last ready on 27 December, and ɻown to Moscow. The next day Voronov was told to rewrite it. Stalin insisted that the ɹrst phase of the attack, focused on the Karpovka-Marinovka nose in the south-west, should come from the north-west and be coordinated with another operation at the opposite corner of the Kessel, cutting oʃ the factory district of Stalingrad and the northern suburbs.

Stalin observed at a meeting of the State Defence Committee that the rivalry between Yeremenko, the commander of the Stalingrad Front, and Rokossovsky, the commander of the Don Front, had to be resolved before Operation Ring began. ‘Whom shall we make responsible for the ɹnal liquidation of the enemy?’ he asked. Somebody mentioned Rokossovsky. Stalin asked Zhukov what he thought.

‘Yeremenko will be very hurt’, Zhukov observed.

‘We are not high-school girls,’ Stalin retorted. ‘We are Bolsheviks and we must put worthwhile leaders in command.’ Zhukov was left to pass on the unwelcome news to Yeremenko.

Rokossovsky, the commander-in-chief responsible for the coup de grâce on the Sixth Army, was allowed 47 divisions, 5,610 ɹeld guns and heavy mortars and 169 tanks. This force of 218,000 men was supported by 300 aircraft. But Stalin’s impatience again built up, just as he was planning a strike against the Hungarian Second Army. To his fury, he was told that transport diɽculties had slowed the delivery of reinforcements, supplies and ammunition. Voronov demanded yet another delay of four days. Stalin’s sarcasm was bitter. ‘You’ll be sitting around there until the Germans take you and Rokossovsky prisoners!’ With great reluctance, he agreed to the new date of 10 January. German oɽcers outside the Kessel had been wondering what would happen next. General Fiebig, the commander of VIII Air Corps, wondered after a long conversation with Richthofen: ‘Why don’t the Russians crush the Kessel like a ripe fruit?’ Red Army oɽcers on the Don Front were also surprised about the delay, and wondered how long it would be before they received their orders to attack. Voronov, however, had received another call from Moscow now telling him that an ultimatum to the Sixth Army must be prepared.

Voronov, in that ɹrst week of January 1943, wrote a draft addressed personally to Paulus. Constant calls from Moscow, with Stalin’s amendments, were necessary. When ɹnally approved, it was translated at Don Front headquarters by ‘German anti-fascists from the group headed by Walter Ulbricht’. Meanwhile, NKVD representatives and Colonel Vinogradov of Red Army intelligence, displaying their usual rivalry, had begun to search for suitable oɽcers to act as truce envoys. In the end, a compromise was reached. Late in the afternoon of 7 January, Major Aleksandr Mikhailovich Smyslov of army intelligence and Captain Nikolay Dmitrevich Dyatlenko of the NKVD, were selected to go together. Vinogradov, when interviewing Dyatlenko, suddenly asked: ‘Are you a khokhol?’ Khokhol, or ‘tufty’, was the insulting term for a Ukrainian, because Russians were often rude about their traditional style of haircut.

‘No, Comrade Colonel,’ replied Dyatlenko stiʀy. ‘I’m a Ukrainian.’

‘So you’re just like a Russian,’ Vinogradov laughed. ‘Well done. You are a suitable representative of the Red Army to meet the fascists.’

Smyslov and Dyatlenko were then briefed by General Malinin, the chief-of-staʃ, and by Voronov himself. One might have thought that Stalin was looking over their shoulder from the way both generals kept asking the envoys whether they fully understood the instructions from Moscow. In fact nobody really had a clear idea of the rules and ritual of a truce envoy. Dyatlenko admitted that his only knowledge came from the play Field Marshal Kutuzov by Solovyov. ‘So lads,’ said Voronov, ‘will you fulɹl your mission?’

‘We will fulɹl it, Comrade Colonel-General!’ they chanted as one.

Malinin then ordered the front quartermaster-in-chief to kit out the two oɽcers in the smartest uniforms available. The Germans had to be impressed. The quartermaster promised to have them ‘dressed like bridegrooms’, and winked ‘like a magician’ at the two envoys. With Voronov’s backing, he had every general’s aide at front headquarters on parade in his department. He ordered them all to strip, so that Dyatlenko and Smyslov could try on their uniforms and boots. The two envoys soon found themselves in a Willys staʃ car, with Colonel Vinogradov. Their destination, they were told, was Kotluban station on 24th Army’s sector.

Russian troops in the area had received the order to cease ɹring from dusk. Then, all through the night, Red Army loudspeakers broadcast a message prepared by Ulbricht’s anti-fascists, telling the Germans to expect truce envoys. By the next dawn, 8 January, ɹring had ceased. Smyslov and Dyatlenko were allotted a tall corporal, equipped with a white ɻag and a three-note trumpet. ‘It was unusually quiet on the snow-covered plain’ when they advanced to the very front trenches. The corporal blew the trumpet call: ‘Attention! Attention! Everybody listen!’ They advanced for about a hundred yards, then ɹring broke out. The three men were forced to dive for cover behind a low rampart made in the snow by Russian reconnaissance groups for night observation. The ‘bridegroom’ uniforms soon looked less smart; they also oʃered little protection from the intense cold.

When the ɹring died away, Smyslov and Dyatlenko rose to their feet and cautiously recommenced their advance. The corporal also stood up, waving the ɻag and blowing his trumpet. Once again, the Germans opened ɹre, but without shooting directly at them. It was clear that they wanted to force the truce envoys to retreat. After several more attempts, a furious Vinogradov sent a message forward

to call oʃ this dangerous version of grandmother’s footsteps.*  Smyslov and Dyatlenko returned to Front headquarters to report, ashamed at the failure of their mission. ‘Why are your noses hanging down, Comrades?’ asked Voronov. ‘The situation is such that it is not we who should ask them to accept our proposals, but vice versa. So we’ll give them some more ɹre, and they will themselves come begging for them.’ During that night, Russian aircraft ɻew over German positions, dropping leaɻets printed with the ultimatum to Paulus, and a message addressed to ‘Deutsche Oɽziere, Unteroɽziere und Mannschaften!’, both signed by Voronov and Rokossovsky. To underline the message, ‘they supported the words with bombs’. Red Army radio stations also broadcast the text, read by Erich Weinert, on the frequencies most used by the Germans, and a number of German wireless operators acknowledged. The leaɻets were certainly read. A captain in the 305th Infantry Division admitted after capture that oɽcers as well as soldiers had read the Soviet leaɻets in secret, despite the penalties, ‘because forbidden fruit is sweet’. Sometimes they showed leaɻets in Russian to a trusty Hiwi and asked him to translate. ‘Everyone knew about the ultimatum,’ he said.

Smyslov and Dyatlenko had slept for only a couple of hours at front headquarters when they were woken at around midnight. A staʃ car was outside waiting for them by the time they had dressed in their old uniforms (the ADCs had immediately reclaimed their property). When they reached the intelligence department, they discovered that Colonel Vinogradov had been promoted to Major-General and that they had been awarded the Order of the Red Star. Vinogradov, having joked that he had been promoted ‘for all the trousers he had worn out during his service’, added that Smyslov and Dyatlenko would receive an even more important medal if they managed to carry out their mission at a second attempt.

The two envoys were told to climb into a staʃ car with Vinogradov and the oɽcer appointed to replace him as chief of intelligence. As they drove through the night again, the two newly promoted generals sang songs and ‘kept interrupting each other with generals’ anecdotes’. (Although Dyatlenko’s respectful account does not say that they were drunk, they certainly appear to have been celebrating their promotions.) The rhythm of the songs was continually broken, as the staʃ car lurched in and out of huge potholes along the frozen dirt roads. It was a long journey round the southern side of the Kessel, crossing the Don westwards, then back across again at Kalach to the sector covered by 21st Army. Shortly before dawn, they reached the headquarters of the 96th Riɻe Division, a few miles to the west of Marinovka.

Rather like condemned prisoners, Smyslov and Dyatlenko were given breakfast, boosted ‘by a Narkom’s [government minister’s] ration’. Vinogradov put a stop to a second helping, and told them to get ready. They then suddenly realized that they had handed the white ɻag back to the quartermaster at front headquarters. A new one had to be made, using one of the divisional commander’s sheets nailed crudely to a branch from an acacia.

The staʃ car drove them to the front line and parked in a balka, from where the party proceeded forwards on foot. Smyslov and Dyatlenko were joined by an elderly warrant oɽcer, with a trumpet, who introduced himself as: ‘Commander of the musical platoon Siderov’. A lieutenant also stepped forward and oʃered to escort them through the mineɹelds – ‘because my life is not worth as much as yours,’ he explained.

The three envoys put on camouɻage suits just behind the front trenches, then set oʃ across the white expanse which blurred into a heavy mist. Some two dozen humps of snow ahead were frozen bodies. General Vinogradov and the other two generals climbed on to a burnt-out Russian tank to watch proceedings. Siderov blew the trumpet. The call ‘Attention! Attention!’ sounded, in Dyatlenko’s ears, more like ‘The Last Post’.

As they came closer to the German lines, they saw ɹgures moving. It looked as if the front-line bunkers and trenches were being reinforced. Siderov waved the ɻag and blew the trumpet again urgently. ‘What do you want?’ a warrant oɽcer called.

‘We are truce envoys from the commander of the Red Army,’ Dyatlenko shouted back in German. ‘We are on our way to your commander-in-chief with a message. We ask you to receive us according to international law.’

‘Come here then,’ he said. Several more heads popped up and guns were levelled at them. Dyatlenko refused to advance until oɽcers were called. Both sides became nervous during the long wait. Eventually, the warrant oɽcer set oʃ towards the rear to fetch his company commander. As soon as he had left, German soldiers stood up and started to banter. ‘Rus! Komm, komm!’ they called. One soldier, a short man, bundled in many rags, clambered up on to the parapet of the trench and began to play the fool. He pointed to himself in an operatic parody. ‘Ich bin Oɽzier’ he sang.

‘I can see what sort of an oɽcer you are,’ Dyatlenko retorted, and the German soldiers laughed. The joker’s companions grabbed his ankles and dragged him back into the trench. Smyslov and Siderov were laughing too.

Finally, the warrant oɽcer returned, accompanied by three oɽcers. The most senior of them asked politely what they wanted. Dyatlenko explained, and asked if they would be received according to international convention, with guarantees for their safety. Complicated discussions followed on detail – whether they should remove their snow suits and have their eyes bandaged – before they were allowed forward. After the oɽcers on both sides had exchanged salutes, Smyslov showed the oilskin packet, addressed to Colonel-General Paulus. The German oɽcers whispered urgently among themselves. The senior lieutenant then agreed to take the Soviet representatives to their regimental commander. The black blindfolds issued by the front quartermaster the day before had been handed back with the white ɻag, so they had to improvise with handkerchiefs and belts. All Siderov could oʃer was the blouse of his snowsuit, and when that was fastened round his head, the German soldiers watching from their bunker entrance burst out laughing. ‘Bedouin! Bedouin!’ they called.

The senior lieutenant led Dyatlenko by the hand. After a few steps, he asked, ‘with a smile in his voice’, what was written in the message to Paulus. ‘That we should surrender?’ ‘I am not ordered to know,’ Dyatlenko replied, using the formula of the Tsarist army. They changed the subject.

‘Tell me please,’ said the lieutenant, ‘if it is true that a German writer called Willi Bredel has been in Platonovsky? He has been addressing my soldiers on the radio for ten or maybe fourteen days. He appealed to them to surrender, and swore that their lives would be spared. Of course, my soldiers just laughed at him. But was he really here? It was clear from his accent that he was from Hamburg. So was it really him or a record of his voice?’

Dyatlenko longed to reply. Bredel was indeed one of the Germans working for his section and he got on well with him. But if he gave any hint, then the lieutenant would have understood immediately what his ‘real job’ was. An unplanned diversion occurred at that moment. The ice on which they were walking was both uneven from shell ɹre, yet also polished by the passage of boots wrapped in rags. Dyatlenko fell, knocking down the lieutenant. Smyslov, hearing the commotion, shouted in alarm. Dyatlenko reassured Smyslov and apologized to the lieutenant. He was not afraid of a trick. ‘About a thousand prisoners of war had passed through my hands by then,’ he wrote afterwards. ‘I knew their psychology suɽciently well as a result, and I knew that these men would not harm me.’

German soldiers who came to lift the two fallen men slipped over in their turn, making a sprawling mass of bodies. Dyatlenko compared it to the Ukrainian children’s game called ‘A little heap is too little: someone is needed on top.’

The lieutenant kept up his questioning when the blindfold march resumed, then returned to the question of Bredel. Dyatlenko was less than frank. He said that the name was known to him and he had even read some of his books. Finally, the lieutenant warned him that they were coming to some steps.

The three truce envoys found themselves, when their blindfolds were removed, in a well-built bunker lined with tree-trunks. Dyatlenko noticed two sacks with spoiled grey grain, which they were trying to dry out. ‘That serves you right, you snakes,’ Dyatlenko thought. ‘You burned the Stalingrad grain elevator and now you have to dig food for yourselves out from under the snow.’ He also observed the coloured postcards and Christmas paper decorations still in place.

A senior German oɽcer entered and demanded to know the authority for their mission. ‘The Stavka of the Red Army command,’ replied Dyatlenko. The senior oɽcer then left the bunker, presumably to telephone. During the colonel’s absence, the German oɽcers and Dyatlenko discussed Christmas celebrations. They then discussed pistols and the Germans admired Dyatlenko’s Tokarev. He rapidly surrendered it when the Russian truce envoys realized, to their great embarrassment, that according to international convention they should have left behind their personal weapons.

To maintain the fairly cordial atmosphere, Siderov opened the packet of ‘Lux’ cigarettes – what Dyatlenko called ‘general’s cigarettes’ – which had been specially issued to them to impress the German oɽcers. ‘With great dignity, Siderov oʃered the packet to the Germans as if he had always smoked the best, and not makhorka.’ He asked Dyatlenko to tell them that this was his third war: he had fought in ‘the Imperialist War, the Civil War and now the Great Patriotic War’. Dyatlenko expected him to add ‘against German fascist invaders’, but in fact Siderov smiled and said: ‘And during all these three wars, I have never had the chance to talk to the enemy so peacefully.’ The German oɽcers agreed and added that this little assembly consisted of the most peaceful people on the whole front. Conversation rather came to a halt after that. In the ensuing silence, they heard heavy ɹring. The Russians were horriɹed. One of the Germans dashed out of the bunker to discover what was happening. He returned with the accusation: ‘It was your people.’ Fortunately, the ɹring soon ceased. (The truce envoys discovered later that it had been Russian antiaircraft batteries unable to resist the temptation when German transport aircraft appeared overhead.)

Tension rose during the long wait for the colonel’s return. But when he came, it was not to announce as expected that a staʃ car had been sent from Sixth Army headquarters. He had, in Dyatlenko’s words, ‘a very diʃerent expression – like a beaten dog’. The junior oɽcers, guessing what had happened, rose to their feet ‘as if a sentence was about to be pronounced on all of them’.

‘I am ordered’, the colonel announced to the Russians, ‘not to take you anywhere, not to accompany you, nor to receive anything from you, only to cover your eyes again, to lead you back, to return your pistols and to guarantee your safety.’

Dyatlenko protested most volubly. He oʃered, even though it was against his instructions, to give the oilskin packet to a specially authorized oɽcer in return for a receipt.

‘I am ordered to take nothing from you,’ replied the German colonel.

‘Then we ask you to write on the package that you, in accordance with orders received from higher command, refuse to accept the letter addressed to your army commander.’ But the colonel refused even to touch the packet. There was nothing left, Smyslov and Dyatlenko concluded, but to allow themselves to be blindfolded again and escorted back. The same senior lieutenant guided Dyatlenko back.

‘How old are you?’ Dyatlenko whispered after they had set oʃ.

‘Twenty-four,’ he replied. There were only a few years between them.

‘This war between our peoples is a tragic mistake,’ Dyatlenko said after a short pause. ‘It will ɹnish sooner or later and it would be good for me to meet you on that day, wouldn’t it?’

‘There is no room for illusions in my heart,’ said the German lieutenant, ‘because before a month is up, both you and I will be dead.’

‘Did you Germans really think’, said Dyatlenko, ‘that Russia would let you spend a peaceful winter in warm bunkers?’

‘No, it was possible to assume from the experience of the past winter that you would launch an oʃensive. But nobody expected it on such a scale or in such a way.’ ‘You told me earlier that your soldiers just laugh at the appeals of Willi Bredel.’ Out of professional curiosity, Dyatlenko could not resist ignoring his instructions to avoid topical issues. ‘But wasn’t he right when he spoke about your hopeless situation. Weren’t his appeals serious?’

‘Everything he said was right,’ the lieutenant replied. ‘But don’t forget one thing. When a war of two world outlooks is going on, it is impossible to persuade enemy soldiers by throwing words across the front lines.’

On reaching the trenches, the eyes of the three Russian oɽcers were uncovered. Their pistols and snow suits were handed back. The two groups of oɽcers faced each other and saluted, then the Russians, under Siderov’s ɻag, returned ‘through the white silence’ to General Vinogradov who was still waiting by the burnt-out tank.

Vinogradov led them back to the balka. The commander of divisional reconnaissance lost no time. ‘Siderov,’ he said, ‘quickly draw me a map of their defences.’ The other two truce envoys followed them into a bunker dug into the side of the balka and watched ‘our old man who spoke to the enemy so peacefully’, draw a map of their ɹre points perfectly. ‘I don’t know if he had been given this mission from the start,’ wrote Dyatlenko afterwards, ‘Or whether it was just his skill, but it transpired that he had been remembering everything.’ Dyatlenko and Smyslov then returned to front headquarters in the Willys staʃ car with the two generals, ‘sad and tired’ because their mission had been a failure and many men were to die for no purpose.

OceanofPDF.com Part Five

THE SUBJUGATION OF THE SIXTH ARMY

OceanofPDF.com 20

The Air-Bridge

‘The misty cloud hung low,’ wrote Hans Dibold, a doctor with the 44th Infantry Division, ‘it all but touched one’s head. In that cloud the engine of a lost transport plane wailed forlornly.’

The term ‘air-bridge’ was seldom used in the theatre of operations. The idea of a permanent link over the heads of the Russians gratiɹed the illusionists looking at maps and charts in Berlin and Rastenburg. Hitler would suddenly demand information, so every general and staʃ oɽcer, desperate to have the ɹgures to hand, constantly badgered airɹeld commanders for the latest statistics and proof of action. This compulsive interference from above only made things worse. Luftwaʃe generals in Germany had leaped to obey Hitler’s decision to resupply the Sixth Army by air, allocating thoroughly unsuitable aircraft like the Ju-86, an aeroplane used for training pilots, to make the numbers look better. Even the use of gliders was considered until somebody observed that Russian ɹghters would destroy them with ease.

Chaos was also caused by rear airbase commanders sending forward Junkers 52s before they had been adapted for winter operations, simply to prove that they were reacting to the Führer’s call quickly. The mass of transport aircraft arriving without warning had caused chaos, particularly since an air-supply operations group was not in place to take control. At the end of November, General Fiebig and the staʃ of VIII Air Corps took over responsibility, and the situation greatly improved, even though fundamental ɻaws in the whole project condemned it to failure from the start.

General von Richthofen had warned that they would need six fullsized airɹelds within the Kessel, not just one, and also properly trained ground staʃ. His fear about the shortage of runways was rapidly justiɹed under bad weather conditions. The best day had been 19 December, when 154 aircraft landed with 289 tons, but good ɻying days were rare indeed. Weather was not the only problem. The airɹeld at Pitomnik attracted all the enemy’s attention, so shot-up and crashed aircraft frequently made it unusable for short periods. Their burnt-out metal carcasses were pushed out into the snow beside the runway, forming a ‘widely strewn machine graveyard’. Landing by night was doubly dangerous. The air-defence batteries at Pitomnik had an almost impossible balance to maintain. They needed to use searchlights to pick out Soviet night bombers, but the base of their beams provided a target for Russian artillery.

The strain on Luftwaʃe aircrew was intense. ‘Young and inexperienced aircrews were badly shaken’ by the sights at Pitomnik, above all the miserable condition of the wounded waiting by the side of the runway for evacuation, and the piles of frozen corpses, left by the ɹeld hospital there because the ground was frozen too hard to bury them.

Whatever the Sixth Army’s gratitude for the Luftwaʃe’s eʃorts, exasperation was inevitable. When one consignment was opened and found to contain only marjoram and pepper, Lieutenant-Colonel Werner von Kunowski, the Sixth Army’s Quartermaster, exploded: ‘Which ass was responsible for this load?’ An oɽcer with him joked that at least the pepper could be used in close-quarter combat.

After the Soviet attack on Tatsinskaya, the transport ɻeet was greatly reduced, leaving a much smaller pool from which serviceable aircraft could be tasked. Also, the new Ju-52 airbase at Salsk, just over 200 miles from Pitomnik, was close to the maximum operational range, so any aircraft whose engines burned up oil could not be used. In desperation, some of the Luftwaʃe’s largest four-engined aircraft – the Focke-Wulf 200 Condor, which could take up to six tons, and the Junkers 290, which could manage a load of up to ten tons – were brought into service, but they were vulnerable and lacked the solidity of the old ‘Tante Ju’ trimotor. Once Salsk also came under threat, in mid-January, the remaining JU-52S had to move north-west to Zverevo north of Shakhty. This new airɹeld consisted of a packed-snow runway on open agricultural land. There was no accommodation, so ground crew, control staʃ and aircrew lived in igloos and tents.

Icing became an even greater problem in the air, while on the ground, engines became harder and harder to start. Heavy snowfalls often brought bases to a halt, since every plane had to be dug out of drifts. There were few anti-aircraft defences at Zverevo, and on 18 January, Soviet ɹghters and bombers, coming in eighteen waves during the course of the day, managed to destroy another ɹfty JU52S on the ground. This was one of the few really eʃective operations by Red Army aviation, whose pilots still lacked conɹdence.

Richthofen and Fiebig had felt from the beginning that they had no choice but to make the best of a doomed job. They expected little understanding from above. ‘My trust in our leadership has rapidly sunk below zero’, Richthofen told General Jeschonnek, the Luftwaʃe chief-of-staʃ, on 12 December. A week later, on hearing that Goering had told Hitler that the supply situation in Stalingrad was ‘not so bad’, he had written in his diary: ‘Apart from the fact that it would do his ɹgure a power of good to spend a little time in the Kessel, I can only assume that my reports either are not read or are given no credence.’

While Goering did nothing to stint his appetite, General Zeitzler, in a gesture of solidarity with the starved troops in Stalingrad, reduced his own rations to their level. According to Albert Speer, he lost twenty-six pounds within two weeks. Hitler, informed of this diet by Martin Bormann, ordered Zeitzler to return to normal eating. As a concession, Hitler banned champagne and brandy at Führer headquarters ‘in honour of the heroes of Stalingrad’.

The vast majority of civilians in Germany had little idea of how close the Sixth Army was to ɹnal defeat. ‘I hope that you’ll break the encirclement soon,’ a young woman wrote to her soldier penfriend in mid-January, ‘and when you do, you’ll be given leave straight away.’ Even the Nazi Party chief of Bielefeld wrote in midJanuary to General Edler von Daniels to congratulate him on the birth of his child, his Knight’s Cross and promotion and said that he looked forward to seeing him ‘very soon back amongst us again’.

The atmosphere of unreality pervaded the most senior government circles in Berlin. Speer, deeply disturbed by the situation at Stalingrad, accompanied his wife, ‘who like everybody else still suspected nothing untoward’, to a performance of The Magic Flute at the opera. ‘But sitting in our box, in those softly upholstered chairs among this festively attired audience, all I could think of was that same kind of crowd at the Paris Opera when Napoleon was retreating in Russia, and of the now identical suʃering of our own soldiers.’ He ɻed back to his ministry, seeking escape in work, and tried to suppress his ‘horrible feelings of guilt’ towards his brother, a private in the Sixth Army at Stalingrad.

Speer’s parents had recently rung him in panic. They had just heard that their youngest son Ernst was lying in ‘a primitive ɹeld hospital’ in a stable, ‘only partly roofed and without walls’ suʃering from jaundice with fever, swollen legs and kidney pains. Speer’s mother sobbed on the telephone: ‘You can’t do this to him.’ And his father said: ‘It’s impossible that you, you of all people, can’t do something to get him out.’ Speer’s sense of helplessness and guilt was compounded by the fact that the year before, following Hitler’s order that senior oɽcials must not use inɻuence on behalf of relatives, he had fobbed oʃ his brother with a promise to get him transferred to France once the campaign was over. Now the last letter from Ernst in Stalingrad said that he could not stand watching his fellow patients die in the ɹeld hospital. He had rejoined his comrades in the front line, despite his grotesquely swollen limbs and pathetic weakness.

Within the Kessel, as the Sixth Army waited for the ɹnal Russian oʃensive, stories spread not just of an SS Panzer Corps approaching, which Hitler had promised for mid-February, but even of an airtransported division being ɻown into the Kessel to bolster their defences. Some rumours lost all touch with reality. Darker spirits claimed that the Fourth Panzer Army had got to within a dozen miles of their lines, but Paulus had then told General Hoth not to advance any further. Some soldiers even convinced themselves later that Paulus, as part of a secret deal with the Russians, had betrayed them. According to another story, ‘the Russians have issued an order, that anyone who shoots a [captured] German pilot will be severely punished, because they were needed to ɻy transport planes in the rearmost areas, such was the shortage of Soviet aircrew’.

Rumours were bound to spread in their strange communities, whether the encampments round the airɹelds, or dugouts in balkas on the steppe, grouped together like a troglodyte village. If there was any wood to burn in the small bunker stoves, smoke emerged from little chimney stacks, made from empty food tins rammed together. Duckboards, tables, even bunks as men died, were broken up as fuel. The only substitute for real warmth was a fug, created with packed bodies and tarpaulins, but men still shivered uncontrollably. The comparative heat did little more than stir their lice into activity, and drive them wild with itching. They often slept two to a bunk with a blanket over their heads in a pathetic attempt to share body heat. The rodent population swelled rapidly on a diet of dead horses and humans. Out in the steppe, mice became voracious in their search for food. One soldier reported that mice had ‘eaten two of his frozen toes’ while he was asleep.

When rations arrived, on a sledge pulled by a starved pony, stiʃ, ungainly ɹgures, wrapped in rags, emerged to hear the latest rumours. There was no fuel to melt snow for washing or shaving. Their hollow-cheeked faces were waxen and unshaven – the beards pathetically straggly from calcium deɹciency. Their necks were thin and scrawny like those of old men. Their bodies crawled with lice. A bath and clean underwear were as distant a dream as a proper meal. The bread ration was now down to under 200 grams per day, and often little more than 100 grams. The horseɻesh added to ‘Wassersuppe’ came from local supplies. The carcasses were kept fresh by the cold, but the temperature was so low that meat could not be sliced from them with knives. Only a pioneer saw was strong enough.

The combination of cold and starvation meant that soldiers, when not on sentry, just lay in their dugouts, conserving energy. The bunker was a refuge which they could hardly face leaving. Often, their minds went blank because the chilling of their blood slowed down both physical and mental activity. Books had been passed round until they disintegrated or were lost in the mud or snow, but now few had the energy left to read. In a similar way, Luftwaʃe oɽcers running Pitomnik airɹeld had given up chess in favour of skat because any eʃort of concentration was beyond them. In many cases, however, the lack of food led not to apathy but to crazed illusions, like those of ancient mystics who heard voices through malnutrition.

It is impossible to assess the numbers of suicides or deaths resulting from battle stress. Examples in other armies, as already mentioned, rise dramatically when soldiers are cut oʃ, and no army was more beleaguered than the Sixth Army at Stalingrad. Men raved wildly in their bunks, some lay there howling. Many, during a manic burst of activity, had to be overpowered or knocked senseless by their comrades. Some soldiers feared breakdown and madness in others as if it were contagious. But the greatest alarm was provoked when a sick comrade had dilated nostrils and black lips and the whites of his eyes turned pink. The fear of typhus seemed curiously atavistic, almost as if it were a medieval plague.

The sense of approaching death could also stimulate an intense awareness of all that they were about to lose. Tough men dreamed feverishly of images of home, and wept silently at the idea of never seeing wife or children again. More reɻective characters reexamined memories, or studied the world about them, especially their comrades, with a new interest. Some even had enough emotion left to feel sorry for the starving horses gnawing desperately at a piece of wood.

For the ɹrst week or ten days in January, before the Soviet oʃensive broke, men tried not to let their true degree of wretchedness show in letters home. ‘I received a quarter litre of vodka and thirteen cigarettes for the New Year,’ wrote a soldier called Willy to his parents in a letter which never reached them, ‘but all the food I’ve got now is a piece of bread. I’ve never missed you more than today when we were singing the “Wolgalied”. I’m sitting in a cage here – it’s not made of gold but of the Russian encirclement.’ Many soldiers camouɻaged the truth even further. ‘We can only count upon the fact that spring will start soon,’ a soldier called Seppel wrote home. ‘The weather is still bad, but the main thing is to be healthy and have a good stove. The Christmas holidays passed well.’ Others, however, did not try to conceal their feelings: ‘The only thing left to me is to think about the three of you,’ a soldier wrote to his wife and children.

Some desperate to escape considered self-inɻicted wounds. Those who went through with it did not just risk execution. Even if no suspicions were aroused, they risked death from their own action. A light ɻesh wound was not enough to earn a ɻight out of the Kessel. A shot through the right hand was too obvious, and with so few soldiers left in the front line, the wound had to be disabling if they were to be released from combat duties. But once the ɹnal Soviet advance began, even ‘a light wound which hindered movement, practically signiɹed death’.

From early January, an increasing number of German soldiers began to surrender without resistance or even to desert to the enemy. Deserters tended to be infantrymen at the front, partly because they had more opportunity. There were also cases of oɽcers and soldiers who refused evacuation, out of bravery and an almost obsessive sense of duty. Lieutenant Löbbecke, the commander of a company of tanks in 16th Panzer Division, had lost an arm in the ɹghting, but soldiered on without having the wound properly treated. His divisional commander could not persuade him to go for treatment. Eventually, General Strecker got hold of him.

‘I request permission to stay with my men,’ Löbbecke said immediately. ‘I cannot leave them now when the ɹghting is so desperate.’ Strecker, presumably from the smell, realized that the stump of Löbbecke’s arm was putrefying. He had to order him on to an aircraft out of the Kessel to a base hospital.

For the truly incapacitated, the only hope of evacuation back to a ɹeld hospital was by sled or in an ambulance. Their drivers were already recognized as ‘steering-wheel heroes’, because of the very high casualty rate. A moving vehicle – and ambulances were among the very few allowed any fuel – immediately attracted Russian ground ɹre or air attack.

Walking wounded and sick made their own way to the rear through the snow. Many stopped to rest and never rose again. Others arrived in spite of appalling wounds or advanced frostbite. ‘One day somebody knocked at our bunker,’ remembered a Luftwaʃe lieutenant at Pitomnik. ‘Outside stood an older man, a member of the Organisation Todt engaged on road repair. Both his hands were so badly swollen from frostbite that he would never be able to use them again.’

Reaching the general hospital by the airɹeld was still far from a guarantee of evacuation or even treatment in the large tents, which did little to keep out the cold. Wounds and frostbite represented only a small part of the workload, which threatened to overwhelm doctors. There was a jaundice epidemic, dysentery and all the other sicknesses, accentuated by undernourishment and often dehydration, since there was no fuel to melt the snow. The wounded were also far more exposed to Soviet air attack than they had been at the front. ‘Every half-hour Russian aircraft attacked the airɹeld,’ reported a corporal later. ‘Many comrades who were just about to be saved, having been loaded into aircraft, and were waiting to take oʃ, lost their lives at the very last moment.’

The evacuation by air of the wounded and sick was just as unpredictable as the incoming supply ɻights. On three days, 19 and 20 December and 4 January, over a thousand were taken on each occasion, but the overall average, including days when no ɻights were possible, between 23 November and 20 January came to 417.

Selection for the aircraft was not made by the severity of wounds. It developed into a ruthless triage due to the shortage of aircraft space. ‘Only the lightly wounded, those able to move themselves, could hope to get away,’ recounted an oɽcer courier. ‘There was enough room for only about four stretchers inside a Heinkel fuselage, but you could pack in nearly twenty walking wounded. So if you had been severely hit, or were so sick that you could not move, you were as good as dead.’ Luck, however, could still intervene. By pulling rank, this oɽcer managed to get an infantry non-commissioned oɽcer, who had been lying at the airɹeld for three days with a bullet lodged in his back, on to his aircraft. ‘How this man had got to the airɹeld, I never knew.’ He also pulled another NCO, an elderly man with a high fever, on board.

The Feldgendarmerie, hated by the troops and known as the ‘chain dogs’ because of the metal crescent gorget, hung on a chain, which they wore round their necks, guarded access to the runway, checking papers minutely to make sure that no malingerers got through. As hope of escape diminished in January, they resorted more and more to their sub-machine-guns to hold back the wounded and malingerers.

Many more wounded ɹtted into the giant, four-engined FockeWulf Condors, of which a few were used from the second week of January. They were, however, exceptionally vulnerable if overloaded. One sergeant in the 9th Flak Division watched the lumbering acceleration of a Condor on to which two of his wounded comrades had just been loaded. As the aircraft rose steeply after take-oʃ to gain height, the helpless human cargo inside must have shifted or rolled towards the back, because the tail suddenly dropped. The engines screamed as the nose pointed almost vertically into the sky, then the whole aircraft fell back to the ground just beyond the perimeter and exploded in a ɹreball with a ‘deafening sound’.

Further out, soldiers at the west end of the Kessel witnessed the fate of Junkers transports, knowing full well that their heavy outbound loads consisted of wounded comrades. Often these aircraft ‘could not gain height quickly enough and ran into heavy ɻak, thus coming to a terrible end. I saw from my trench on several occasions this apocalyptic fate and was very, very depressed.’

As well as ɻying out wounded, couriers and certain specialists, the aircraft still brought in some oɽcers and men who had gone on leave just before the Kessel was closed. Because of the news blackout in Germany, many of them had no idea of what had happened in their absence until their train reached Kharkov. Manstein’s aide, Alexander Stahlberg, described how his twenty-one-year-old cousin by marriage, Gottfried von Bismarck, arrived at Army Group Don headquarters at Novocherkassk on 2 January after Christmas leave at home in Pomerania. He had received an order to ɻy into the Kessel to rejoin the 76th Infantry Division. Manstein, on discovering the circumstances, invited him to his table for dinner, where conversation was unrestrained. Both Manstein and Stahlberg greatly admired the way the young man, with no complaint, upheld the Potsdam tradition of the 9th Infantry Regiment by returning to a lost battle, not for Hitler, but out of a Prussian devotion to duty. Bismarck himself, however, put it in less glorious terms. ‘I was a soldier, I had received an order and was obliged to accept the consequences.’

General Hube, when he returned to the Kessel on 9 January, the eve of the Soviet oʃensive, told Paulus and Schmidt that Hitler simply refused to acknowledge the possibility of defeat at Stalingrad. He had not listened to his account of conditions in the Kessel, instead he had tried to convince him that a second relief attempt might well be brought forward.

Some of Hube’s oɽcers were downcast that he, of all people, seemed to have been taken in by one of Hitler’s performances of mesmerizing optimism – the ‘sun-ray cure’. ‘I was deeply disappointed’, recorded Hube’s intelligence oɽcer, Prince Dohna, ‘how easily such a brave and upright soldier could be persuaded.’ Others, however, heard that Hube had even dared ‘to advise Hitler to try to ɹnish the war’, and when Hube died in a plane crash the following year, rumours spread that Hitler might have had a hand in it. In a way, both sides were right. When Hube had reported to Army Group headquarters before ɻying back into the Kessel, Manstein certainly believed that he had been taken in by one of Hitler’s displays of conɹdence. On the other hand, he subsequently discovered that Hube had dared suggest to Hitler that he might do better to hand over supreme command of the army to a general, so that he would not be damaged personally if the Sixth Army were lost.

Hube had been one of the Führer’s favourite commanders, but his evident belief that the Sixth Army was doomed only conɹrmed Hitler’s suspicion that all generals were infected with pessimism. Paulus recognized this. He came to the conclusion that only a highly decorated young warrior might appeal to Hitler’s romantic notions and thus be in a better position to persuade him to listen to the truth.

Paulus had an obvious candidate for this mission in the form of Captain Winrich Behr, whose black panzer uniform with the Knight’s Cross was likely to produce the right eʃect on the Führer. And Behr, responsible for updating not only the situation map, but also all the facts and ɹgures in reports, was one of the best-briefed oɽcers at Sixth Army headquarters.

Behr received so little warning of his mission on the morning of 12 January, two days after the start of the Soviet oʃensive, that he did not have time to oʃer to take letters home from his colleagues. He bundled up the Sixth Army war diary in his belongings to take it to safety, then hurried to Pitomnik. The runway was already under ɹre from heavy mortars as well as artillery. As Behr ran to the Heinkel III, ɹlling with wounded, the Feldgendarmerie armed with sub-machine-guns had to hold back hundreds of others trying to rush, or even crawl, to the plane.

The ɻight to Taganrog took one and a half hours. To his surprise, it was even colder down by the Sea of Azov than at Stalingrad. A staʃ car was waiting for him and he was taken to Field Marshal von Manstein’s headquarters. Manstein assembled some of his oɽcers and asked Behr to report on the situation. Behr described everything: the famine; the casualty rates; the exhaustion of the soldiers; the wounded lying in the snow, waiting for evacuation, their blood frozen; the pitiful shortage of food, fuel and ammunition. When Behr had ɹnished, Manstein told him: ‘Give Hitler exactly the same description as you gave me.’ An aeroplane had been ordered for the next morning to take him to Rastenburg. The Führer was expecting him.

The following morning was just as cold, even though the bright sun gave a deceptive impression of warmth. At the airɹeld the Luftwaʃe oɽcer assigned to ɻy Behr to East Prussia did not bother to take his gloves with him when he went out to warm up the motors. When he returned to the building he had no skin left on his hands from touching frozen metal. Another pilot had to be found.

Behr ɹnally reached the Wolfsschanze in the early evening. His belt and pistol were taken from him at the guardroom. From there, he was escorted to the operations room, where eighteen months later Stauʃenberg brought his briefcase ɹlled with explosives. There were between twenty and twenty-ɹve senior oɽcers present. After ten minutes, the doors opened and Hitler appeared. He greeted the young panzer captain.

‘Heil Herr Hauptmann!’

‘Heil mein Führer!’ replied Behr, rigidly at attention in his black uniform, with the Knight’s Cross at the neck. Behr already knew from his brother-in-law, Nicolaus von Below, who was Hitler’s Luftwaʃe adjutant, what the Führer’s tactics were when a ‘Cassandra’ brought bad news. He always tried to control the conversation, imposing his version of events, and overwhelming his interlocutor, who knew only about a single sector of the front, with a powerful impression of the overall situation. This was exactly what happened.

When Hitler had ɹnished recounting his plans for Operation Dietrich, a great counter-attack with SS panzer divisions turning defeat into victory, he said to Behr: ‘Herr Hauptmann, when you return to General Paulus, tell him this and that all my heart and my hopes are with him and his Army.’ But Behr, well aware that this was Hitler’s ‘trick’, knew that he must not allow himself to be silenced.

‘Mein Führer,’ he answered. ‘My commander-in-chief gave me the order to inform you of the situation. Please now give me permission to deliver my report.’ Hitler, in front of so many witnesses, could not refuse.

Behr began to speak, and Hitler, rather to his surprise, made no attempt to interrupt him. He did not spare his audience any detail, including the growing desertions of German soldiers to the Russians. Field Marshal Keitel, unable to bear such frankness in the Führer’s presence, shook his ɹst at Behr from behind Hitler’s back in an attempt to silence him. But Behr continued relentlessly with his description of the exhausted, starving and frozen army, faced by overwhelming odds, and without the fuel or ammunition to repulse the new Russian oʃensive. Behr had all the ɹgures of the daily deliveries by air in his head. Hitler asked if he was certain of these statistics, and when Behr replied that he was, he turned to a senior Luftwaʃe oɽcer and asked him to explain the discrepancy.

‘Mein Führer,’ replied the Luftwaʃe general, ‘I have here the list of planes and cargoes dispatched per day.’

‘But mein Führer,’ Behr interrupted. ‘For the Army, what is important is not how many planes were sent out, but what we actually receive. We are not criticizing the Luftwaʃe. Their pilots really are heroes, but we have received only the ɹgures I have told you. Perhaps some companies retrieved odd canisters and kept them, without notifying their headquarters, but not enough to make a diʃerence.’

Some senior oɽcers tried to deɻect Behr’s criticisms with ‘idiotic questions’, but Hitler proved surprisingly helpful, probably because he wanted to appear to defend the interests of the Stalingradkämpfer against the general staʃ. But when Behr came to the situation facing the Sixth Army, Hitler turned back to the great map dotted with little ɻags as if nothing had changed. Behr knew that these ɻags, ‘the same as months before’, now represented ‘divisions with only a few hundred men left’. Yet Hitler once again resorted to his message of reversing the whole situation by a brilliant counterstroke. He even proclaimed that a whole SS Panzer Army was already grouping round Kharkov, poised to strike towards Stalingrad. Behr knew from Field Marshal von Manstein that the SS formations being brought eastwards would need several more weeks. ‘I saw then that he had lost touch with reality. He lived in a fantasy world of maps and ɻags.’ For Behr, who had been an enthusiastic and ‘nationalistic young German oɽcer’, the revelation came as a shock. ‘It was the end of all my illusions about Hitler. I was convinced that we would now lose the war.’

Behr was not sent straight back to the Kessel as planned. He saw Hitler again the next day at noon, with Field Marshal Milch, who was ordered to galvanize Luftwaʃe relief eʃorts to Stalingrad. Behr was later summoned by Hitler’s senior military aide, General Schmundt, and subjected to a long and searching, although friendly, interview. Schmundt, one of Hitler’s most loyal admirers (he was to die eighteen months later from Stauʃenberg’s bomb), quickly sensed that the young panzer captain had lost his faith. Behr admitted this openly when the question was put. Schmundt therefore decided that he should not be sent back to Paulus, in case he passed on his misgivings. Behr would return to the Black Sea coast, and work there at Melitopol as part of the new ‘Special Staʃ’ to be set up under Field Marshal Milch to help Fortress Stalingrad hold out to the last.

At Rastenburg, General Stieʃ and also Lieutenant-Colonel Bernhard Klamroth, who knew Behr well from before the war, took him aside and asked – ‘in a coded manner’ – whether he would join a movement to oust Hitler. Behr, who had only just seen the truth

OceanofPDF.com OceanofPDF.com ‘about Hitler’s disastrous leadership, felt that he could not do a complete about-turn. Klamroth understood, but warned him to be careful with Manstein. ‘At table he is very much against Hitler, but he just shoots his mouth oʃ. If Hitler were to order him to turn left or right, he would do exactly what he was told.’

Klamroth’s criticism was not exaggerated. For all the disrespect Manstein showed for the Führer in private among trusted subordinates and with his dachshund’s trick of raising its paw in the Nazi salute, he did not want to risk his own position. In his memoirs, he used what might be called the stab-in-the-back argument: a coup d’état would have led to an immediate collapse of the front and chaos inside Germany. He was still part of the oɽcer class, whose anti-Bolshevik loathing had been moulded by the 1918 mutinies and revolution. Behr took Klamroth’s advice, and was cautious when he reported back to Army Group Don.

Manstein’s fear of Hitler was soon demonstrated. The frank discussions among his own oɽcers about responsibility for the Stalingrad disaster unnerved him so much that he issued an order to his chief of staʃ that ‘Discussions about the responsibility for recent events must cease’ because ‘they can do nothing to change the facts of the matter and can only cause damage by undermining conɹdence’. Oɽcers were also strictly forbidden to discuss ‘the causes for the destruction of the Sixth Army’ in their personal correspondence.

The Führer now wanted, whatever the outcome, a heroic example for the German people. On 15 January, he awarded Paulus the Oak Leaves to his Knight’s Cross and announced 178 other important decorations for members of the Sixth Army. Many recipients still failed to recognize how double-edged these honours were.

Manstein, on the other hand, while despising Hitler’s motives, knew that he too needed to prolong the agony of the Sixth Army. Every extra day that it held on gave him more time to pull the two armies in the Caucasus back to a defensible line. Hitler, through one of his grotesque twists of logic, could now argue that his decision to order Paulus to maintain his position had been correct.

The madness of events seems to have become slightly infectious. Max Plakolb, the Luftwaʃe oɽcer in charge of the radio operators at Pitomnik, recorded several strange messages of exhortation they received from their own senior commanders. On 9 January, the day that the Soviet ultimatum was proclaimed, Plakolb and another member of his team received orders to ɻy out of the Kessel. ‘ Taking leave of those staying behind was hard. Each one wrote a letter home, which we took with us.’ But like almost everyone escaping the Stalingrad Kessel at that time, he experienced a sensation of being born again. ‘Thus did this 9 January become my second birthday.’ Those escaping, however, were bound to undergo some form of survivor guilt. ‘We never heard anything more of those comrades left behind.’

Everyone who had the chance entrusted last letters or small important possessions to comrades allotted a place on the aircraft. The piano-playing battalion commander from 16th Panzer Division had fallen sick, so Dr Kurt Reuber persuaded him to take the ‘Fortress Madonna’ with him. Reuber also managed to ɹnish a last picture for his wife when his commanding oɽcer’s departure was delayed by a day because of bad weather. His last letter to her from Stalingrad went with it. He saw no point in shrinking from the reality of what they faced. ‘Scarcely an earthly hope remains…’

It was some time before soldiers realized that the Christmas post delivered on 22 December was probably the last they would receive from the outside world. Odd batches came through afterwards, one as late as 18 January, but the regular Luftpost eʃectively ceased after 13 January, when soldiers were told that they had a last chance to write home. Many mentioned in their letters that they only had time ‘to scribble a couple of lines’. As a doctor observed in a letter to his father, ‘The mood here is very mixed. Some take it very badly, others lightly and in a composed way. It is an interesting study in character.’ The main contrast seems to be between those who wrote to impress their family with the patriotic symbolism of their approaching death, and those who wrote out of love. The latter, unlike the fervent nationalists, usually started their letter as gently as possible: ‘Perhaps this will be the last letter from me for a long time.’

A Major von R. wrote to his wife: ‘You are always my ɹrst and last thought. I am certainly not abandoning hope. Things are, however, so serious, that one does not know whether we will see each other again. Our men have been and still are achieving the impossible. We must not be less brave than them.’

The word ‘fate’ seems to be about the only word shared equally. ‘Dear parents,’ wrote a corporal. Tate has decided against us. If you should receive the news that I have fallen for Greater Germany, then bear it bravely. As a last bequest, I leave my wife and children to your love.’

Those most devoted to the regime focused far more in a self-important way on national honour and the great struggle, than on family farewells. They wrote of the ‘fateful battle of the German nation’, while still maintaining that ‘our weapons and our leadership are still the best in the world’. In an attempt to derive a meaning from the grotesque tragedy, they buoyed themselves up with the idea that future generations would see them as the defenders of Europe from Asiatic bolshevism. ‘This is a heroic struggle, the like of which the world has never experienced in such cold,’ wrote a sergeant. ‘German heroes guarantee Germany’s future.’

These letters were never delivered. Captain Count von Zedtwitz, the chief of Fourth Panzer Army’s ɹeld-post censorship, had been given the task of studying letters from the Stalingrad Kessel, to report on morale and feelings towards the regime. Although his reports bent over backwards to avoid sounding defeatist, it appears that Goebbels ordered that this last collection of post should be held back and eventually destroyed. The above quotations come from a sample apparently copied by Heinz Schröter, a junior oɽcer formerly attached to the Sixth Army’s propaganda company, who had been commissioned by the propaganda ministry to write an epic

account of the battle.* 

Other letters had already been intercepted in a very diʃerent way. General Voronov recorded that, on 1 January, ‘we heard in the evening that a German transport plane had been shot down over our positions. About 1,200 letters were discovered in the wreckage.’

At Don Front headquarters, the department run by Captain Zabashtansky and Captain Dyatlenko went to work with every spare interpreter as well as all the German ‘anti-fascists’ on the mailbags for three days. They included letters in diary form from General Edler von Daniels to his wife. According to Voronov and Dyatlenko, the latest letter of 30 December revealed much about the weak defences of the 376th Infantry Division on the south-western ɻank, which tied in with what the NKVD interrogators had managed to ɹnd out from prisoners.

Until the ɹnal Soviet oʃensive began on 10 January, the main preoccupation of the Sixth Army remained the same. ‘Enemy No. 1 is and always remains hunger!’ wrote a doctor. ‘My dear parents,’ a corporal wrote home pathetically, ‘if it’s possible, send me some food. I’m so ashamed to write this, but the hunger is too much.’

German soldiers started to take great risks, venturing forward into no man’s land to search the corpses of Russian soldiers for a crust of bread or a bag of dried peas, which they would boil in water. Their greatest hope was to ɹnd a twist of paper containing salt, for which their bodies ached.

The hunger pains of German soldiers in the Kessel were indeed bad, but others suʃered far more. The 3,500 Russian prisoners of war in the camps at Voroponovo and Gumrak were dying at a rapidly accelerating rate. Several German oɽcers were deeply shocked to discover during January that these prisoners were reduced to cannibalism, and made verbal reports. When Russian troops reached the camps at the end of January, the Soviet authorities claimed that only twenty men remained alive out of the original 3,500.

The spectacle which greeted the Russian soldiers – to judge by the ɹlm taken by newsreel cameras rushed to the spot – was at least as bad as those seen when the ɹrst Nazi death camps were reached. At Gumrak, Erich Weinert described the scene: ‘In a gully, we found a large heap of corpses of Russian prisoners, almost without clothes, as thin as skeletons.’ The scenes, particularly those of the ‘Kriegsgefangen-Revier’ ɹlmed at Voropovono, may have done much to harden the hearts of the Red Army towards the new defeated.

Many of the thousands of Hiwis still attached to German divisions were starving too. Girgensohn, after carrying out an autopsy on one corpse, told the German oɽcer in charge that this particular Hiwi had indeed died of hunger. This diagnosis ‘left him completely astonished’. He claimed that his Hiwis received the same rations as German soldiers.

Many were treated quite well by their German oɽcers, and there are numerous accounts demonstrating mutual trust during the last battle. But by then Russians in German uniform knew that they were doomed. There were no places for them on the aircraft ɻying out, and the encircling Soviet armies were accompanied by NKVD troops waiting to deal with them.

OceanofPDF.com 21

‘Surrender Out of the Question’

The front out in the steppe had been comparatively quiet during the ɹrst week in January. Most of the time, there had been little more than the dull crack of a sniper’s riɻe, the odd burst of machine-gun ɹre, and the distant whistle at night of a signal ɻare going up: altogether what a lieutenant called ‘the usual melody of the front’. After the broadcast and leaɻet drops on 9 January, German soldiers knew that the ɹnal oʃensive was imminent. Sentries, shivering uncontrollably, had an even stronger reason to stay awake.

One soldier remarked to a chaplain on his rounds just before the oʃensive: ‘Just a little bit more bread, Herr Pfarrer, then come what may.’ But the bread ration had just been reduced to seventy-ɹve grams. They all knew that they would have to face the Soviet onslaught weak from hunger and disease and with little ammunition, even if they did not entirely understand the reason.

There was both a fatalism – ‘one spoke about death just like about a breakfast’ – yet also a will to believe. Ordinary soldiers believed the stories of the SS Panzer Corps and reinforcements landing by air. In the 297th Infantry Division, soldiers continued to be convinced, ‘that the relief force has already reached Kalach… the Grossdeutschland and the Leibstandarte divisions’. A star shell seen to the west was instantly interpreted as a signal from them. Even junior oɽcers were misinformed by their superiors, as a lieutenant told his NKVD interrogator. Right into the ɹrst week of January, his regimental commander in the 371st Infantry Division was still telling them: ‘Help is close.’ The shock was great when they heard ‘through informal sources’ (presumably Luftwaʃe personnel) about the failure of the attempt to rescue them and Army Group Don’s retreat to the west. The NKVD, on the other hand, was soon shaken to discover the number of Russians now ɹghting for the Germans in the front line at Stalingrad, not just labouring as unarmed Hiwis. German accounts certainly seem to indicate that a considerable proportion of the Hiwis attached to Sixth Army divisions in the Kessel were now ɹghting in the front line. Many oɽcers testiɹed to their skill and loyalty. ‘Especially brave were the Tartars,’ reported an oɽcer in the factory district of Stalingrad. ‘As anti-tank gunners using a captured Russian weapon, they were proud of every Soviet tank they hit. These fellows were fantastic’ Lieutenant-Colonel Mäder’s battle group, based on two grenadier regiments from the 297th Infantry Division at the southernmost point of the Kessel, contained no fewer than 780 ‘combat-willing Russians’, nearly half his force. They were entrusted with key roles. The machine-gun company had twelve Ukrainians ‘who conducted themselves really well’. Their worst problem, apart from lack of food, was the shortage of ammunition. The battle group’s nine ɹeld guns were rationed to an average of one and a half shells per gun per day.

Operation Koltso, or ‘Ring’, began early on Sunday, 10 January. Rokossovsky and Voronov were at the headquarters of 65th Army when the order ‘Fire!’ was given over the radio at ɹve past six, German time. Guns roared, bouncing on their chassis from the recoil. Katyusha rockets screamed into the sky leaving dense trails of smoke. The 7,000 ɹeld guns, launchers and mortars continued for ɹfty-ɹve minutes in what Voronov described as ‘an incessant rolling of thunder’.

Black fountains appeared all over the snow-covered steppe, obliterating the white scene. The bombardment was so intense that Colonel Ignatov, an artillery commander, remarked with grim satisfaction: ‘There are only two ways to escape from an onslaught of this character – either death or insanity.’ In an attempt to be nonchalant, General Edler von Daniels described it as a ‘very unpeaceful Sunday’ in a letter to his wife. The grenadier regiment from his division in the front line was in no mood for levity, ɹnding itself extremely vulnerable in its hastily prepared positions. ‘The enemy munition reserves’, wrote their commander, ‘were so huge, that we had never experienced anything like it.’

The south-western protuberance of the Kessel, the ‘Marinovka nose’, defended by the 44th, 29th Motorized and the 3rd Motorized Infantry Divisions, was strengthened at the last moment by part of the 376th. Every regiment was desperately under strength. The 44th Infantry Division had to be reinforced with artillerymen and even personnel from construction battalions. Several tanks and heavy weapons were allotted to the sector. Just behind the pioneer battalion’s position were two self-propelled assault guns and an 88mm antiaircraft gun. But in the bombardment, the pioneers saw their own battalion headquarters blasted to pieces. ‘Nobody came out,’ wrote one of them. ‘For an hour, a hundred guns of various calibres and Stalin Organs ɹred away,’ wrote a lieutenant in the same division. ‘The bunker swayed continually under the bombardment. Then the Bolsheviks attacked in terrifying masses. Three waves of men rolled forward, never ɻinching. Red banners were borne aloft. Every ɹfty to a hundred yards there was a tank.’

The Landsers, their ɹngers so swollen from frostbite that they could hardly ɹt inside the trigger guard, ɹred from shallow foxholes at the riɻemen advancing across the snowɹelds with long spike bayonets ɹxed. Russian T-34S, some carrying infantry like monkeys on the backs of elephants, lurched across the steppe. The high winds which cut through clothing had blasted away the snow, exposing the top of the colourless steppe grass. Mortar shells rebounded oʃ the frozen earth and exploded as air bursts, causing far more casualties. The defences of the 44th Infantry Division were soon smashed, and its survivors, once in the open, were at the mercy of the enemy as well as the elements.

During the afternoon, the 29th and 3rd Motorized Infantry Divisions in the main protuberance of the nose started to ɹnd themselves outɻanked. In the 3rd Motorized Infantry Division, the replacement soldiers were apathetic. ‘Some of them were so exhausted and sick,’ wrote an oɽcer, ‘and thought only of slipping away to the rear at night, that I could only keep them in their positions at pistol point.’ Other accounts suggest that many summary executions were carried out during this last phase, but no ɹgures are available.

Sergeant-Major Wallrawe’s scratch company of panzer grenadiers, Luftwaʃe troops and ‘Cossacks’ held out until ten o’clock on the ɹrst night, when they received the order to pull back because the enemy had broken past them. They managed to take up a position north of Karpovka station, but were soon pushed back again. ‘From this day on, we had neither warm bunker nor warm food nor any peace!’ wrote Wallrawe.

These weakened divisions, with little ammunition, stood no chance against the mass attacks of the Soviet 21st and 65th Armies, backed by the ground-attack aircraft of the 16th Air Army. The Germans had fortiɹed Marinovka and Karpovka on the south side of the nose with pillboxes and gun emplacements, but this was of little use with the main thrusts coming from the bridge of the nose. German attempts to counter-attack with odd groups of their remaining tanks and weakened infantry were doomed. The Russians used heavy mortar ɹre to separate the infantry from tanks, then obliterated the survivors in the open. The Don Front political department hammered home the slogan: ‘If the enemy does not surrender, he must be destroyed!’

While the 65th and 21st Armies attacked the ‘Karpovka nose’ on that ɹrst day, the 66th Army attacked the 16th Panzer and the 60th Motorized Infantry Divisions at the northernmost point, where the undulating hills were stained a blackish yellow colour, burned bare by Soviet trench mortars. The remaining tanks of the 2nd Panzer Regiment once again scored hit after hit on waves of T-34S charging across the open, and forced the survivors to withdraw.

Meanwhile, on the southern sector, the 64th Army began to bombard the 297th Infantry Division and the 82nd Romanian Regiment attached to it. Soon after the shelling began, Colonel Mäder received a call from a divisional staʃ oɽcer: ‘Those pigs of Romanians have made a run for it.’ The furthest battalion had retreated, leaving a hole half a mile wide on the ɻank of his battle group. The Russians, spotting the opportunity, sent in tanks, and pushed a hole deep into the line. The position of the whole division was at risk, but its pioneer battalion, led by Major Götzelmann in a semi-suicidal counter-attack, managed to seal the gap for a time.

This partly Austrian division, which had not suʃered like those withdrawn across the Don, managed to maintain a robust defence. Over the next two days, it continued to ɹght oʃ the 36th Guards Riɻe Division, the 422nd Riɻe Division, two brigades of marine infantry and part of the 13th Tank Corps. When a soldier ‘with previous convictions’ tried to desert to the Russians, he was shot down by his own comrades before he reached enemy lines. But within a few days, after intense propaganda attempts, more than forty others deserted to the enemy.

The main Soviet eʃort was concentrated on the advance from the west. By the end of the second morning, 11 January, Marinovka and Karpovka were captured. The victors counted 1,600 German corpses.

As soon as the ɹghting was over, peasant women appeared as if from nowhere and rushed over to the German trenches to search for blankets, either for their own needs, or as currency. Erich Weinert, accompanying the advancing troops, saw Russian soldiers throwing the ɹles oʃ the backs of trucks captured at a headquarters so that they could use the vehicles themselves. ‘Karpovka looks like an enormous jumble sale,’ he wrote. But amid the chaos of abandoned and destroyed military material, he saw the results of the terrible opening bombardment. ‘The dead are lying, grotesquely twisted, their mouths and eyes still wide open with horror, frozen stiʃ, with their skulls torn open and their bowels hurled out, most of them with bandages on their hands and feet, still soaked with yellow antifrostbite ointment.’

The Sixth Army’s resistance, when one considers its physical and material weakness, was astonishing. The most telling measure lies in the casualties it inɻicted during the ɹrst three days. The Don Front lost 26,000 men and over half its tank force. Soviet commanders made little attempt to reduce casualties. Their men provided easy targets, advancing in extended line. Brown clumps of Russian dead littered the snow-covered steppe. (White camouɻage suits were reserved mainly for reconnaissance companies and snipers.) The anger of Russian soldiers and oɽcers was vented on their German prisoners, skeletal and lice-infested. Some were shot on the spot. Others died when they were marched oʃ in small columns, and Soviet soldiers sprayed them with machine-gun ɹre. In one case, the wounded commander of a shtraf company forced a captured German oɽcer to kneel before him in the snow, cried out the reasons why he was seeking revenge, then shot him.

During the early hours of 12 January, the Soviet 65th and 21st Armies reached the west bank of the frozen Rossoshka river, thus eliminating the Karpovka nose. Those troops who withdrew, still intending to ɹght, had to manhandle their anti-tank guns with them. In some cases, Russian prisoners were again used as draught animals, and worked to death. It was so cold and the ground was frozen so hard, General Strecker noted, that ‘instead of digging trenches, our soldiers build up defensive snow banks and snow bunkers’. The panzer grenadiers of 14th Panzer Division, ‘resisted bitterly, even though they had virtually no more ammunition, out in the open on the frozen steppe’.

Few members of the Sixth Army felt like celebrating Goering’s ɹftieth birthday that day. The shortage of fuel and ammunition was catastrophic. Sixth Army headquarters was not exaggerating in its signal to General Zeitzler the next morning. ‘Munitions coming to an end.’ When Wallrawe’s mixed group, occupying old Russian positions dug the previous summer, faced another major attack the following morning they could ‘open ɹre only at the closest range because of the lack of ammunition’.

The lack of fuel in this retreat made the evacuation of the wounded more diɽcult than ever. Incapacitated patients who had been piled in trucks, which then ground to a halt, just froze to death in the open. Those ‘soldiers with blue-black faces’ who reached Pitomnik airɹeld were shaken by the scene. ‘The airɹeld’, noted a young oɽcer, ‘was in chaos: heaps of corpses, which men had carried out of the bunkers and tents which house the wounded, and dumped; Russian attacks; bombardments; Junkers transport planes landing.’

Lightly wounded soldiers and malingerers, appearing like a horde of beggars in rags, tried to rush the aircraft as they landed, in an attempt to board. Unloaded cargo was thrown aside or ransacked for food. The weakest in these hordes were trampled underfoot. The Feldgendarmerie, rapidly losing control of the situation, opened ɹre on numerous occasions. Many of the badly wounded with legitimate exit passes doubted that they would ever escape from this hell.

Sergeant-Major Wallrawe, meanwhile, had received a shot in the stomach. This was usually a death sentence in the Kessel, but he saved himself through determination. Two of his corporals carried him back from their position, and put him on a truck with other wounded. The driver headed straight for Pitomnik airɹeld. With only two miles left to go, they ran out of fuel. The driver was under orders to destroy the vehicle in such circumstances. He could do nothing for the wounded, who were ‘left to their fate’. Wallrawe, despite the intense pain from his wound, knew that he would die unless he made it on to a plane. ‘I had to crawl the rest of the way to the airɹeld. By then night had fallen. In a huge tent I received some medical help. Bombs from a sudden air raid fell among the hospital tents, destroying a number of them.’ In the chaos which ensued, Wallrawe managed to get himself on to an outbound ‘Ju’ at three in the morning.

At Pitomnik a chance coincidence might save a wounded man’s life, while hundreds of others were left to die in the snow. Alois Dorner, a gunner with the 44th Infantry Division who had been wounded in the left hand and left thigh by shell splinters, was appalled by the scenes at Pitomnik. ‘Here was the greatest misery that I have seen in my whole life. An endless wailing of wounded and dying men… most of them had received nothing to eat for days. No more food was given out to the wounded. Supplies were reserved for ɹghting troops.’ (It is hard to tell how far this was oɽcial policy. Senior oɽcers at Sixth Army headquarters have strongly denied it, but some subordinate commanders appear to have instituted it on their own authority.) Dorner, who had not eaten since 9 January, was also expecting to die, when in the night of 13 January, the Austrian pilot of a Heinkel 111 passed by and happened to ask where he came from. ‘I’m from near Amstetten,’ he replied. His fellow Austrian called over another member of his crew, and together they carried Dorner to the plane.

On the northern ɻank, 16th Panzer and 6oth Motorized Infantry Divisions had been beaten back, leaving a dent in that sector, while in Stalingrad itself, Chuikov’s 62nd Army attacked the 100th Jäger and the 305th Infantry Divisions, retaking several blocks. Meanwhile, the main Soviet advance from the west continued through driving snow, crushing in the western side of the Kessel. The 29th Motorized Infantry Division was eʃectively wiped out. A lack of fuel forced the 3rd Motorized Infantry Division to abandon their vehicles and heavy weapons and retreat on foot through the thick snow. There was little hope of establishing a new defence line on the open steppe when soldiers did not have the strength to dig in.

The Soviet 65th and 21st Armies pushed on towards Pitomnik, assisted by the 57th and 64th Army’s breakthroughs on the southern ɻank, where the 297th Infantry Division, including Mäder’s battle group, was forced backwards. Their right-hand neighbour, Edler von Daniels’s 376th Infantry Division, was cut oʃ. Early in the afternoon of 14 January, Sixth Army headquarters signalled: ‘376 Infantry Division is destroyed. It is probable that Pitomnik airɹeld will only be usable until 15 January.’

News of Soviet tank attacks now caused ‘panzer-fright’ in German ranks. There were hardly any anti-tank guns left with ammunition. Nobody had time to reɻect on the way they had despised the Romanians for just such a reaction two months before. At this rather late stage in the battle, Hitler decided that the Sixth Army must be given more help to hold out. His motives were almost certainly mixed. He may have been genuinely shocked to ɹnd from Captain Behr how little help was getting through, but he must also have wanted to make sure that Paulus had no excuse for surrender. His solution – a characteristic move triggering great activity for little tangible result – was to establish a ‘Special Staʃ’ under Field Marshal Erhard Milch to oversee the air-supply operation. One member of Milch’s staʃ described this belated move as ‘Hitler’s excuse to be able to say that he had tried everything to save the soldiers in the Kesse!’.

Albert Speer accompanied Milch to the airɹeld, when he was setting oʃ to take up his new role. Milch promised to try to ɹnd his brother and have him ɻown out of the Kessel, but neither Ernst Speer, nor even the remains of his unit, could be found. They had all disappeared, ‘missing presumed dead’. The only trace, Speer recorded, was a letter which came out by air, ‘desperate about life, angry about death, and bitter about me, his brother’.

Milch and his staʃ reached Taganrog believing that they could achieve a great deal, but, as a senior Luftwaʃe transport oɽcer wrote, ‘One look at the actual situation was enough to convince them that nothing more could be done with the inadequate resources available’.

The morning of 15 January, their ɹrst day of work, did not mark an encouraging start. Milch received a telephone call from the Führer demanding that the Stalingrad airlift be increased. As if to underline his eʃorts, Hitler that day awarded Paulus the Oak Leaves to his Knight’s Cross. At lunchtime Goering rang Milch to forbid him to ɻy into the Kessel. Fiebig then reported that Pitomnik had fallen to the Russians (in this he was slightly premature), and that the radio beacons in Gumrak had not yet been set up, which meant that transport aircraft should not be dispatched.

The remaining Messerschmitt 109s ɻew out of Pitomnik soon after dawn the next morning, when the advancing Russians were in view. Those which diverted to Gumrak airɹeld landed to ɹnd heavy snow, which had not been cleared. At midday, Gumrak also came under artillery bombardment, and the Messerschmitts and Stukas there ɻew out of the Kessel for the last time on Richthofen’s orders. Paulus protested in vain.

That day a battalion of the 295th Infantry Division surrendered en bloc. Voronov’s leaɻet promising correct treatment of prisoners appears to have had some eʃect. ‘It was senseless to run away,’ the battalion commander said during his interrogation by Captain Dyatlenko. ‘I told my men that we would surrender in order to save lives.’ This captain, who had been an English teacher, added, ‘I feel very bad because this is the ɹrst case of a whole battalion of German troops surrendering.’

Another battalion commander who surrendered later, this one with the 305th Infantry Division in Stalingrad, spoke of the ‘unbearable conditions in our battalion’. ‘I could not help my men and I avoided meeting them. Everywhere in our regiment I heard soldiers talk of the suʃering from cold and hunger. Every day our medical oɽcer received dozens of frostbite casualties. Because the situation was so catastrophic, I considered that surrendering the battalion was the best way out.’

Pitomnik airɹeld and its ɹeld hospital were abandoned with great suʃering. Those who could not be moved were left behind in the care of a doctor and at least one orderly, the standard practice in a retreat. The rest of the wounded either limped, crawled or were dragged on sledges along the pitted road of iron-hard ice which led over eight miles to Gumrak. The few trucks left with any fuel were frequently stormed, even when they were already full of wounded. A Luftwaʃe captain reported on conditions along the route on 16 January, the day Pitomnik fell: ‘Heavy one-way traɽc consisting of retreating soldiers, who appear like complete down and outs. Feet and hands are wrapped in strips of blanket.’ In the afternoon he recorded a ‘considerable increase in stragglers from various arms who had supposedly lost contact with their units, begging for food and shelter’. At times the sky cleared completely, and the sun on the snow was blinding. As evening fell, the shadows became steel blue, yet the sun on the horizon was a tomato red. The condition of almost all soldiers, not just the wounded, was terrible. They limped on frostbitten feet, their lips were cracked right open from frost, their faces had a waxen quality, as if their lives were already slipping away. Exhausted men slumped to the snow and never rose again. Those in need of more clothes stripped corpses of clothing as soon as they could after the moment of death. Once a body froze, it became impossible to undress.

Soviet divisions were not far behind. ‘It is severely cold,’ Grossman noted as he accompanied the advancing troops. ‘Snow and the freezing air ice up your nostrils. Your teeth ache. There are frozen Germans, their bodies undamaged, along the road we follow. It wasn’t us who killed them. The cold did. They have bad boots and bad coats. Their tunics are thin and look like paper… There are footprints all over the snow. They tell us how the Germans withdrew from the villages along the roads, and from the roads into the ravines, throwing their arms away.’ Erich Weinert, with another unit, observed crows circling, then landing, to peck out the eyes of corpses.

At one point, on approaching Pitomnik, Soviet oɽcers started to check their bearings, because far ahead they had sighted what appeared to be a small town on the steppe, yet none was marked on their maps. As they came closer, they saw that it consisted of a huge military junkyard, with shot-up panzers, trucks, wrecked aircraft, motor cars, assault guns, half-tracks, artillery tractors and almost every other conceivable item of equipment. The greatest satisfaction for Russian soldiers came from seeing abandoned and shot-up aircraft by the airɹeld at Pitomnik, especially the giant Focke-Wulf Condors. Their advance eastwards towards Stalingrad produced constant jokes about being ‘in the rear of the Russians’.

During this stage of the retreat, German hopes of SS panzer divisions and air-landed reinforcements ɹnally expired for most men. Oɽcers knew that the Sixth Army was indeed doomed. ‘Several commanders’, recorded a doctor, ‘came to us and begged for poison to commit suicide.’ Doctors were also tempted by the idea of oblivion, but as soon as they considered it carefully, they knew that their duty was to stay with the wounded. Of the 600 doctors with the Sixth Army, none capable of working ɻew out.

Casualty clearing stations at this time were so overcrowded that patients shared beds. Often when a severely wounded man was carried in by comrades, a doctor would wave them away because he already had too many hopeless cases. ‘Faced with so much suʃering,’ recorded a Luftwaʃe sergeant, ‘so many men in torment, so many dead and convinced that there was no possibility of help, without a word we carried our lieutenant back with us. Nobody knows the names of all those unfortunate men who, huddled together on the ground, bleeding to death, frozen, many missing an arm or a leg, ɹnally died because there was no help.’ The shortage of plaster of paris meant that doctors had to bind shattered limbs with paper. ‘Cases of post-operative shock soared,’ recorded a surgeon. Diphtheria cases also increased greatly. The worst part was the growth of lice on the wounded. ‘On the operating table we had to scrape lice oʃ uniforms and skin with a spatula and throw them into the ɹre. We also had to remove them from eyebrows and beards where they were clustered like grapes.’

The ‘so-called hospital’ at Gumrak was even worse than that at Pitomnik, largely because it was swamped by the inɻux. ‘It was a form of hell,’ reported a wounded oɽcer who had retreated from the Karpovka nose. ‘The corpses lay in heaps beside the road, where men had fallen and died. Nobody cared any more. There were no bandages. The airɹeld was under bombardment, and forty men were packed into a bunker dug for ten, which shook with every explosion.’ The Catholic chaplain at the hospital was known as the ‘Death king of Gumrak’ because he was giving extreme unction to over 200 men a day. Chaplains, after closing the eyes of the dead, used to snap oʃ the bottom half of the identity disk as oɽcial proof of death. They soon found their pockets heavy. Doctors nearby also worked in the ‘death ravines’, with the wounded lying in the tunnels dug out of the side for horses. For one doctor, the place, with its cemetery just above, was Golgotha. This central dressing station and centre for cranial injuries had to be abandoned, with the most severely wounded left behind. When the Russians arrived a few days later, they machine-gunned most of the bandaged ɹgures. Ranke, a divisional interpreter, suʃering from a head wound, rose up and yelled at them in Russian. In astonishment, the soldiers stopped shooting and took him to their commissar, who in turn sent him on behind the retreating Germans to demand surrender.

If Russian soldiers were in a mood for vengeance, then the frozen corpses of Red Army prisoners in the open camp nearby provided much to ɹre their anger. The survivors were so badly starved that when their rescuers gave them bread and sausage from their rations, most died immediately.

*

The Kessel would have collapsed far more rapidly if some men had not retained a hard core of belief in the cause for which they were ɹghting. A Luftwaʃe sergeant with the 9th Flak Division wrote home: ‘I am proud to number myself among the defenders of Stalingrad. Come what may, when it is time for me to die, I will have had the satisfaction of having taken part at the most eastern point of the great defensive battle on the Volga for my homeland, and given my life for our Führer and for the freedom of our nation.’ Even at this late stage, most ɹghting units continued to show dogged resistance, and there were examples of outstanding courage. General Jaenecke reported that ‘an attack by twenty-eight Russian tanks near Bassagino station was halted by a Lieutenant Hirschmann, operating an anti-aircraft gun entirely on his own. He destroyed ɹfteen T-34S in this engagement.’ At this closing stage of the battle, leadership made more diʃerence than ever. Apathy and self-pity were the greatest dangers, both to military order and to personal survival.

On the sectors which had not yet been broken, starving men were too exhausted to go outside the bunker to hide their tears from their comrades. ‘I am thinking about you and our little son,’ wrote an unknown German soldier in a letter which never reached his wife. ‘The only thing I have left is to think of you. I am indiʃerent to everything else. Thinking about you breaks my heart.’ Out in the ɹre-trenches, men were so cold and weak that their slow, uncoordinated movements made them appear as if they were drugged. Yet a good sergeant would keep a grip on them, making sure that riɻes were still cleaned and grenades stocked ready to hand in excavated shelves.

On 16 January, just after the capture of Pitomnik, Sixth Army headquarters sent a signal, complaining that the Luftwaʃe was only parachuting supplies. ‘Why were no supplies landed tonight at Gumrak?’ Fiebig replied that landing lights and ground-control radios were not working. Paulus seemed to be unaware of the chaos at the airɹeld. The unloading parties were badly organized and the men too weak to work properly – ‘completely apathetic’, was the Luftwaʃe’s opinion. Discipline had broken down among the lightly wounded as well as stragglers and deserters drawn to the airɹeld and its promise of salvation. The Feldgendarmerie ‘chain dogs’ were starting to lose control over the mobs of starving soldiers, desperate to get away. According to Luftwaʃe reports, many were Romanians.

By 17 January, the Sixth Army had been forced back into the eastern half of the Kessel. There was comparatively little ɹghting over the next four days, as Rokossovsky redeployed his armies for the ɹnal push. While most German regiments at the front followed orders, disintegration accelerated in the rear. The chief quartermaster’s department recorded that ‘the Army is no longer in any position to supply its troops’. Almost all the horses had been eaten. There was almost no bread left – frozen solid, it was known as ‘Eisbrot’. Yet there were stores full of food, held back by overzealous quartermasters, which the Russians captured intact. Some of those in authority, perhaps inevitably, exploited their positions. One doctor later described how one of his superiors, right in front of his eyes, ‘fed his dog with thickly buttered bread when there was not a single gram available to the men in his dressing station’.

Paulus, convinced that the end was near, had sent a signal on 16 January to General Zeitzler recommending that units which were still battleworthy should be allowed to break out southwards, because to stay in the Kessel meant either imprisonment or death through hunger and cold. Even though no immediate reply was obtained from Zeitzler, preparatory orders were issued. The following evening, 17 January, a staʃ oɽcer with the 371st Infantry Division told Lieutenant-Colonel Mäder that: ‘On the codeword “Lion” the whole Kessel would ɹght its way out on all sides. Regimental commanders were to assemble ɹghting groups of around two hundred of their best men, inform the rest of the line of march, and break out.’

A number of oɽcers had already started to ‘consider ways to escape Russian captivity, which seemed to us worse than death’. Freytag-Loringhoven in 16th Panzer Division had the idea of using some of the American jeeps captured from the Russians. His idea was to take Red Army uniforms and some of their very reliable Hiwis, who wanted to escape the vengeance of the NKVD, in an attempt to slip through enemy lines. This idea spread to the staʃ of the division, including its commander, General Angern. Even their corps commander, General Strecker, was brieɻy tempted when he heard about it, but as an oɽcer with strong traditional values, the idea of leaving his soldiers was out of the question. One group from XI Corps subsequently made the attempt, and a number of other small detachments, some on skis, broke out to the south-west during the last days of the Kessel. Two staʃ oɽcers from Sixth Army headquarters, Colonel Elchlepp and Lieutenant-Colonel Niemeyer, the chief of intelligence, died out in the steppe. Paulus clearly never considered the idea of abandoning his troops. On 18 January, when a last post from Germany was distributed in some divisions, he wrote just one line of farewell to his wife, which an oɽcer took out for him. His medals, wedding ring and signet ring were also taken out, but these objects were apparently seized by the Gestapo later.

General Hube received orders to ɻy out from Gumrak early the next morning in a Focke-Wulf Condor to join Milch’s Special Staʃ. On 20 January, after his arrival, he in turn sent a list of ‘trusted and energetic oɽcers’ to be sent out to join him. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the majority were not specialists in supply or air transport, but oɽcers from his own panzer corps, especially his old division. Hube, no doubt, felt justiɹed, since Sixth Army headquarters had stipulated that panzer specialists were among those entitled to evacuation by air.

General-Staʃ-trained oɽcers were also included in the specialist category, but the most curious priority of all was what might best be described as the Sixth Army’s Noah’s Ark. Sergeant-Major Philipp Westrich from 100th Jäger Division, a tilelayer by trade, was ‘ɻown out of the Kessel on 22 January 1943 on the orders of Sixth Army, which requested one man from each division’. Lieutenant-Colonel Mäder and two NCOs were selected from the 297th Infantry Division, and so the list went on, division by division. Hitler, having given up Paulus’s Sixth Army for dead, was already considering the idea of rebuilding another Sixth Army – a phoenix’s egg snatched from the ashes. On 25 January, the idea became a ɹrm plan. Hitler’s chief adjutant, General Schmundt, recorded: ‘The Führer decreed the reforming of the Sixth Army with a strength of twenty divisions.’

Oɽcer couriers, taking out vital documents, had been selected on compassionate grounds. Prince Dohna-Schlobitten, who left on 17 January, was given the job for XIV Panzer Corps headquarters, not because he was the chief intelligence oɽcer, but because he had the most children of any oɽcer on the staʃ. Soon afterwards, Sixth Army headquarters insisted that oɽcers ɻown out as specialists should double as couriers. Captain von Freytag-Loringhoven, selected because of his record as the commander of a panzer battalion, was ordered ɹrst to collect dispatches and other documents from army headquarters. There he saw Paulus, who ‘seemed absolutely bent under the responsibility’.

At Gumrak airɹeld, after a long wait, he went out to one of ɹve Heinkel bombers, escorted by Feldgendarmerie, who had to force back the wounded and sick at the point of their sub-machine-guns. At the moment of leaving the Kessel, he inevitably had mixed feelings. ‘I felt very badly about leaving my comrades. On the other hand it was a chance to survive.’ He had tried to get Count Dohna (a distant cousin of Prince Dohna) out as well, but he had been too sick. Although securely packed into the aircraft, with some ten wounded soldiers, Freytag-Loringhoven could see that they were not out of danger. Their Heinkel remained stationary beside the runway while the other four took oʃ. A pump had jammed during refuelling. Artillery shells began to fall closer. The pilot threw aside the pump, and ran back to the cockpit. They took oʃ, lifting slowly, with their heavy load of wounded, into the low cloud base. At about six thousand feet, the Heinkel suddenly came up out of the cloud and into ‘wonderful sunshine’, and Freytag-Loringhoven was another who felt as if he ‘had been reborn’.

When they landed at Melitopol, ambulances from the base hospital were waiting for the wounded, and a staʃ car took FreytagLoringhoven to Field Marshal Manstein’s headquarters. He had no illusions about his appearance. He was in ‘a very bad state’. Although a tall, well-built man, his weight had fallen to 120 pounds. His cheeks were cavernous. Like everyone in the Kessel, he had not shaved for many days. His black panzer overalls were dirty and torn, and his ɹeldboots were wrapped in rags as a protection against frostbite. Stahlberg, Manstein’s ADC, immaculate in his ɹeld-grey uniform, was clearly taken aback. ‘Stahlberg looked at me and I saw him wondering, “Does he have lice?” – and I certainly did have lice – and he shook hands very cautiously with me.’

Stahlberg took him straight in to see Manstein, who gave him a much more friendly welcome. The ɹeld marshal immediately got up from his desk and came round to shake hands without any apparent qualms. He took the dispatches and questioned the young captain closely about conditions in the Kessel. Yet Freytag-Loringhoven felt that he was essentially ‘a cold man’.

Manstein told Freytag-Loringhoven that he would be attached to Field Marshal Milch’s Special Staʃ established to improve the airlift. He reported ɹrst to Colonel-General von Richthofen, who just acknowledged his arrival and said that he was too busy to see him. Field Marshal Milch on the other hand, ‘an old Nazi’ whom he had not expected to like, proved ‘much more human’. He was horriɹed by Freytag-Loringhoven’s appearance. ‘My God, look at the state of you!’ After asking about the conditions in Stalingrad, Milch said: ‘Now you must have good food.’

He gave orders that Freytag-Loringhoven should receive special rations of meat, butter and even honey. The exhausted young panzer commander was then shown to one of the sleeping compartments on the luxury train. ‘It was the ɹrst time that I had seen a bed in nine months. I did not care about my lice. I threw myself into the white linen and decided to postpone my visit to the delousing station until ɹrst thing the next morning. The comfort and the warmth – it was minus twenty-ɹve degrees outside – was an unbelievable contrast.’

Those oɽcers coming out to work on Milch’s Special Staʃ were disorientated at ɹrst by their transformation to another world of plenty and possibility. But they still had no clear idea of what could and could not be expected of an airlift. ‘Is it possible to ɻy in tanks one by one?’ was one of Hube’s questions at his ɹrst meeting with Milch.

Milch himself, like anybody who had not set foot inside the Kessel, still could not grasp how truly terrible conditions were within. On receiving Paulus’s signal on 18 January that the Sixth Army would be able to hold out for only a few days more because they were virtually out of fuel and ammunition, he told Goering in a telephone conversation: ‘Those in the Fortress appear to have lost their nerve.’ Manstein was of the same opinion, he added. They both seem to have instinctively adopted a policy of personal sympathy for individuals at the same time as they distanced themselves from the horrors suʃered by the abandoned army.

The wider implications of the impending disaster were left to Führer headquarters and the propaganda ministry in Berlin. ‘The Stalingrad Kessel is approaching the end,’ Goebbels had declared at his ministerial conference three days before. ‘The German press must prepare appropriate coverage of the victorious outcome of this great battle in Stalin’s city – if necessary with supplements.’ The ‘victory’ was supposedly one of moral symbolism.

Helmuth Groscurth, Strecker’s chief of staʃ and the most active member of the opposition to the regime in the Kessel, was determined that the facts of the disaster be communicated to senior oɽcers to provoke them into action. He arranged a passage out for one of his trusted colleagues, Major Count Alfred von Waldersee. Waldersee was to go straight to army headquarters, at the Bendlerstrasse in Berlin, to see General Olbricht, a senior member of the opposition, and then the retired General Beck, with the message that ‘only an immediate strike’ against Hitler could now save the Sixth Army. Beck asked Waldersee to go straight to Paris to see General von Stülpnagel and Field Marshal von Rundstedt. Rundstedt’s reply was ‘so depressing’ that Waldersee lost all hope of achieving anything.

Groscurth sent a last letter to his brother on 20 January, the birthday of his daughter Susi – ‘who soon will have a father no more, like thousands of other children’, he wrote. ‘The torment goes on and will get worse by the hour. We are pushed back into the narrowest area. We will, however, ɹght on to the last round, as ordered, particularly since we are told that the Russians have been killing all prisoners, which I doubt… People have no idea what’s going on here. Not a single promise is kept.’

Sixth Army headquarters sensed that Milch’s staʃ did not appreciate how bad things were. ‘There is not a single healthy man left at the front,’ it reported that day, ‘everyone is at least suʃering from frostbite. The commander of the 76th Infantry Division on a visit to the front yesterday came across many soldiers who had frozen to death.’

The Soviet oʃensive began again with renewed force on that morning of 20 January. The 65th Army broke through north-west of Gonchara, which was captured that night. Gumrak, only a few miles away, was the main objective.

The evacuation of the airɹeld and nearby headquarters the following evening was chaotic as Katyusha batteries opened up. That night, Milch’s staʃ received a signal from Sixth Army headquarters: ‘Gumrak airɹeld unusable from 22 January at 04.00 hours. At that time the new airɹeld of Stalingradsky will be clear for landing.’ This was optimistic. The landing strip at Stalingradsky was incapable of taking large aircraft. General Paulus was by then entirely fatalistic, and almost certainly suʃering from deep depression. A Luftwaʃe major just returned from the Kessel reported to Field Marshal Milch that Paulus had told him: ‘Whatever help arrives from now on will be too late. We have had it. Our men have no strength left.’ When the major tried to brief him on the general situation to the west facing Army Group Don, he had replied: ‘Dead men are no longer interested in military history.’

Because of the lack of fuel, 500 wounded men were left in the ɹeld hospital at Gumrak. As dawn rose on the morning of 22 January, Russian infantry could be seen in the distance, advancing in extended line ‘as if on a hare shoot’. As the enemy approached to within riɻe range, oɽcers from 9th Flak Division who had been responsible for the airɹeld packed into the last vehicle, a staʃ car. A hundred yards down the road they found a soldier from the ɹeld hospital, both of whose legs had been amputated, trying to propel himself along on a sled. The Luftwaʃe oɽcers stopped, and tied his sled to the back of the car as he requested, but it overturned almost as soon as they started again. One lieutenant suggested that he cling on to the front, since there was no room left inside. The wounded man refused to hold them up any longer. They were by then within range of the Russian infantry. ‘Leave me!’ he shouted. ‘I haven’t got a chance anyway.’ The Luftwaʃe oɽcers knew that he spoke the truth. Anybody who could not walk at this point was already as good as dead. They drove on and the crippled soldier sat slumped in the snow by the side of the icy track, waiting for the Russians to arrive and ɹnish him oʃ.

He may well have been shot, like many wounded by the wayside. The Communist writer, Erich Weinert, attempted to claim that ‘abandoned cripples’ trying to hobble after their comrades had got in the way of ‘the gunɹre of the advancing Red Army’. The truth was that the Red Army, like the Wehrmacht, made little provision for enemy wounded. Reports that the 500 left behind in the ɹeld hospital at Gumrak in the care of two sick orderlies and a divisional chaplain were massacred are, however, inaccurate. The Red Army just left them to fend for themselves on ‘water from snow and horse carcasses’. Those who survived were moved to the camp at Beketovka ten days later.

The spectacle of defeat grew more terrible the closer retreating soldiers came to Stalingrad. ‘As far as the eye can see, lie soldiers crushed by tanks, helplessly moaning wounded, frozen corpses, vehicles abandoned through lack of fuel, blown-up guns and miscellaneous equipment.’ Meat had been hacked from the ɻanks of a dead horse beside the road. Men dreamed of coming across a parachute container, packed with supplies, but they had been either seized on landing, or lost in the snowɹelds.

Although the collapse in the centre could not be stemmed, in many sectors German battle groups carried out a dogged ɹghting retreat. Early in the morning of 22 January, the remnants of the 297th Infantry Division were pushed back from the Voroponovo sector towards the southern outskirts of Stalingrad. Major Bruno Gebele and the survivors of his battalion awaited the next onslaught. Their only artillery support consisted of several mountain howitzers commanded by a sergeant, who was told to hold his ɹre until the Russians were between 200 and 250 yards away. Shortly before seven o’clock, as the remnants of Gebele’s battalion sheltered from artillery ɹre in their bunkers, a sentry gave the alert: ‘Herr Major, sie kommen!’

Gebele had time only to yell ‘Rausf His soldiers threw themselves into their ɹre positions. A mass of snow-suited infantry was charging towards them, baying ‘Urrah! Urrah! Urrah!’ The ɹrst ones were only forty yards away when the German grenadiers opened ɹre with light machine-guns, riɻes and machine pistols. The Russians suʃered terrible losses. ‘The ɹrst wave was killed or left lying there, the second also, and then a third wave came. In front of our position the Soviet dead piled up and served as a sort of sandbag wall for us.’

The Russians did not abandon the attack. They simply changed its direction, and concentrated against the ɻanking detachments. At nine-thirty, they broke through the Romanians over to the left. An anti-tank round hit Gebele’s second-in-command, who was standing next to him, killing him instantly. Gebele himself then felt a massive blow to his left shoulder. A bullet from the same burst of machinegun ɹre had also killed his chief clerk, Feldwebel Schmidt, having gone straight through his steel helmet. The enraged Gebele, resting a carbine on the snow wall in front of him, was able to get oʃ a few shots, using his good arm and shoulder.

Another wave of Russian infantry came at them. Gebele screamed to his surviving men to open ɹre again. A staʃ sergeant tried ɹring a light mortar, but the range was so short that the headwind made a couple of the bombs fall on their own positions. Eventually, having held out for seven hours, Gebele saw that a Russian ɻag had appeared on a water tower to their rear. They had been outɻanked. He gathered the last survivors of his battalion, and led them back towards the centre of Stalingrad. Inside the city, they were shaken by the scenes of destruction and military collapse. ‘It was bitterly cold,’ wrote one of them, ‘and surrounded by such chaos, it felt as if the world was coming to an end.’

That 22 January – the day after Goebbels had prepared the stage-management of the Stalingrad tragedy by calling for ‘total war’ Sixth Army received the signal from Hitler which sealed its fate. ‘Surrender out of the question. Troops ɹght on to the end. If possible, hold reduced Fortress with troops still battleworthy. Bravery and tenacity of Fortress have provided the opportunity to establish a new front and launch counter-attacks. Sixth Army has thus fulɹlled its historical contribution in the greatest passage in German history.’

OceanofPDF.com 22

‘A German Field Marshal Does Not Commit Suicide with a Pair of Nail Scissors!’

Whenever Luftwaʃe planes ɻew over, men looked up longingly, and continued to stare at the sky well after the tiny dot had disappeared. ‘With heavy hearts’, wrote one soldier, ‘we gazed after the German aircraft and thought how wonderful it would be to be able to ɻy away, out of this inferno in which we had been abandoned.’ After the capture of Gumrak airɹeld early on the morning of 22 January, only a handful of planes had managed to land at the small Stalingradsky landing strip. The ‘air-bridge’, and thus the last line of escape, had collapsed.

Resupply now depended on canisters dropped by parachute, ‘the supply bombs’, but despite Sixth Army’s requests for red canopies, the Luftwaʃe continued to use white. The system of drops became even more hit-and-miss, because few units had any recognition panels left and VIII Air Corps lost radio contact with Sixth Army head-quarters on 24 January. Hube had a message dropped telling soldiers in the ruins of Stalingrad that, on hearing aero-engines, they should lie down on the snow-covered ground in the form of a cross to signify ‘German soldiers here’. When the light or visibility was bad, they ɹred signal ɻares into the air to direct aircraft as they approached, but the Russians all around would immediately shoot ɻares of similar colour into the sky to confuse the pilots. Strong winds also blew many loads across the rapidly changing front lines into enemy hands. Some men were so desperate that they risked trying to retrieve canisters right out in the open. Russian snipers picked them oʃ with ease. In the ruins of Stalingrad, starving German soldiers attempted to ambush Soviet soldiers just to get their bread bag. The fall of Gumrak had meant yet another terrible journey for the wounded, many of whom had already been transferred from Pitomnik, having failed to ɹnd a place on an aeroplane there. ‘Exhausted wounded men dragged themselves to the ruins of the town’, one survivor reported, ‘crawling like wild animals on all fours, in the hope of ɹnding some sort of help.’

The conditions in Stalingrad in the makeshift hospitals were even more appalling than at Gumrak, with around 20,000 wounded packed into cellars under the ruins of the city, to say nothing of the sick, which may well have brought the total to 40,000. Some 600 badly wounded men ɹlled the cellars of the Stalingrad theatre, with no light and no sanitation. ‘Moans, calls for help and prayers’, wrote a doctor from the 60th Motorized Infantry Division, ‘were mixed with the thunder of the bombardment. A paralysing smell of smoke, blood and the stench of wounds ɹlled the room.’ There were no more bandages, no medicine, and no clean water.

A number of doctors from front-line units received orders to help out in the network of tunnels in the Tsaritsa ravine. This complex, like galleries in a mine, now contained over 3,000 seriously wounded or seriously ill soldiers. Dr Hermann Achleitner, on arriving for duty, was reminded immediately of the phrase: ‘Abandon hope all ye who enter here.’ The piles of frozen corpses outside shocked him deeply. Inside, the image of hell was increased by improvised oil lamps as the only source of light. The fetid, deoxygenated air was disgusting to breathe. He was greeted by pitiful cries of ‘Give us something to eat!’ The patients received only one thin slice of stale bread per day. The doctors turned this into a sort of soup, which was hot and made it go a little further. The lack of bandages was serious for the cases of severe frostbite. ‘Often’, he noted, ‘toes and ɹngers stayed behind in the ɹlthy old bandages, when we changed them.’ Delousing was impossible. Medical orderlies changing bandages found a grey mass of lice crawling on to their own wrists and arms from the patient. When a man died, the lice could be seen leaving his body en masse in search of living ɻesh. The doctors did what they could to isolate cases of typhus as soon as it was diagnosed, but they knew that it would not be long before they had an epidemic on their hands. A young German soldier, surveying the misery around, was heard to murmur: ‘They must never know at home what is happening here.’

The retreat from the steppe, as the Kessel was crushed by Rokossovsky’s armies, brought the number of Germans crowded into the ruined city to over 100,000 men. Many, if not most, of them were suʃering from dysentery, jaundice and other sicknesses, their faces tinged a greenish yellow.

The reactions of Stalingrad civilians were not always hostile, as wounded men from the 297th Infantry Division discovered. ‘Two Stalingrad women rubbed my frozen legs for an hour to prevent the eʃects of severe frostbite,’ wrote an oɽcer. ‘Again and again, they looked at me with compassion and said: “So young and yet he must already be dying!” ‘The same group of soldiers, to their astonishment, found several Russian women in a partly wrecked house. They had just baked some bread, and agreed to exchange a loaf for a hunk of frozen horsemeat.

Regiments and divisions were utterly meaningless. The 14th Panzer Division had fewer than eighty men still able to ɹght. Hardly a single tank or heavy weapon with ammunition remained. In such a hopeless situation, discipline was starting to break down. Resistance continued largely through fear of Russian revenge, following Paulus’s rejection of surrender.

Unthreatened by anti-tank guns, Soviet T-34s crushed German weapon pits and gunners alike under their tracks. Bunkers and fortiɹed buildings were destroyed with a ɹeld gun wheeled up to almost point-blank range. German soldiers now suʃered a terrible sense of powerlessness, unable to do anything for their wounded comrades or even for themselves. Their own merciless advances of the previous summer seemed to belong to an entirely diʃerent world. On 25 January, Paulus and Colonel Wilhelm Adam, one of his senior staʃ oɽcers, received light head wounds from a bomb explosion. General Moritz von Drebber surrendered with part of the 297th Infantry Division three miles south-west of the mouth of the Tsaritsa. The Soviet colonel who came to take his surrender is said to have demanded: ‘Where are your regiments?’ Moritz von Drebber, according to this version broadcast two days later on Soviet radio by the novelist Theodor Plievier, another German Communist of the ‘Moscow Emigration’, glanced around at the remaining handful of men, broken by exhaustion and frostbite, and replied: ‘Do I really have to explain to you, Colonel, where my regiments are?’

The chief medical oɽcer of the Sixth Army, General Renoldi, was one of the ɹrst generals to give himself up. (Red Army intelligence ɹrst heard as a result of his interrogation that Paulus was in a state of collapse.) Some generals, however, took an active role. Hube’s replacement, General Schlömer, was shot in the thigh, and General von Hartmann of the 71st Infantry Division was killed by a bullet through the head. General Stempel, the commander of the 371st Infantry Division, shot himself, as did a number of other oɽcers as the enemy seized the south of Stalingrad up to the Tsaritsa river.

On 26 January at dawn, tanks of the 21st Army met up with Rodimtsev’s 13th Guards Riɻe Division north of the Mamaev Kurgan, near the Red October workers’ settlements. The scenes were predictably emotional, especially for Chuikov’s 62nd Army, which had been ɹghting on its own for almost ɹve months. ‘The eyes of the hardened soldiers who met were ɹlled with tears of joy,’ wrote Chuikov. Bottles were passed back and forth in ɹerce celebration. The Stalingrad Kessel was split in two, with Paulus and most of the senior oɽcers bottled up in the smaller, southern pocket, and General Strecker’s XI Corps in the northern part of the city round the Stalingrad tractor factory. His only link with the outside world was the 24th Panzer Division’s radio set.

Over the next two days, German and Romanian stragglers, the wounded and shell-shocked, as well as still-active combat groups, all withdrew into the ever-diminishing southern pocket, where Paulus and Schmidt had set up new headquarters, under the Univermag department store on Red Square. The last symbol of German occupation was the swastika banner hanging from a makeshift ɻagpole fastened to the balcony above the main entrance. The remains of Colonel Roske’s 194th Grenadier Regiment provided its defending force. Roske was promoted to General as the new commander of the extinct 71st Infantry Division.

The increasing number of senior oɽcers who were surrendering meant that Don Front’s 7th Department, responsible for ‘Operational propaganda’, was busier than ever. So many prisoners had been brought in for interrogation since the oʃensive started that it had been hard to select the ‘more interesting’ ones.

Captain Dyatlenko received a signal ordering him to return immediately to Don Front headquarters. Another captured German general had already been brought in for interrogation. Dyatlenko knew it was worth spending time on this new arrival, General Edler von Daniels. The search through the mailbags of the crashed transport aeroplane at the beginning of the month had produced the letters in the form of a diary which Daniels had written to his wife. Daniels, like most newly captured prisoners, was in a vulnerable state. As an experienced interrogator, Dyatlenko knew that the best tactic was the least expected one. He questioned his prisoner obliquely about his ‘Kessel-baby’, then took him oʃ balance by suddenly producing the letters and papers which Daniels thought were safely back in Germany.

‘Herr General,’ Dyatlenko records having said to him. ‘Please have your papers back. This is your property and you can put it in your family archive when you return home after the war.’ Apparently Daniels was overcome with gratitude. He accepted tea and biscuits and Russian cigarettes, and then ‘answered our questions’. Dyatlenko kept at him until evening. After a break for dinner, he carried on until midnight.

On many occasions, such a reɹned approach was not necessary. The psychological confusion and the anger of defeat, produced docility if not cooperation from oɽcers who felt both personally betrayed, and also guilty towards their own men for having assured them of the Führer’s promises of salvation. During interrogation, they often made a point of uttering derogatory remarks against Hitler and the regime. They called Goebbels ‘the lame duck’ and bitterly regretted that the overweight Goering had not undergone a ‘Stalingrad diet’. But it certainly appeared to their Russian captors that these generals had recognized the real character of their Führer only when they experienced the treacherous way in which he had behaved towards them and the Sixth Army. Few of them had described him or his policies as criminal when they were advancing deep into Russia and atrocities were being committed so close behind their front lines that they must have been aware of them, if not in some cases directly responsible.

From these interviews with captured oɽcers, Don Front headquarters formed the ɹrm impression that Paulus ‘was under great strain, playing a role that had been forced on him’. They were increasingly convinced that Paulus was virtually a prisoner in his own headquarters, guarded by his chief of staʃ. Dyatlenko had no doubt that Schmidt was ‘the eyes and hand of the Nazi Party’ in the Sixth Army, because captured oɽcers reported that ‘Schmidt was commanding the Army and even Paulus himself.

Colonel Adam, when interrogated later by Dyatlenko, told him that Schmidt had been the one who gave the order for the truce envoys to be sent back. (Dyatlenko did not reveal that he had been one of them.) The senior oɽcers at Sixth Army headquarters had apparently been well aware of the contents of the oilskin pouch. On that morning of 9 January, when Dyatlenko and Smyslov waited in the bunker, they had read during breakfast the leaɻets dropped by Russian planes with the text of the ultimatum. That same morning, General Hube had ɻown back into the Kessel from his visit to Hitler. He had brought the order that there was to be no surrender. According to Adam, this had strengthened General Schmidt’s intransigent position at Sixth Army headquarters.

On 29 January, the eve of the tenth anniversary of Hitler’s accession to power, Sixth Army headquarters sent a signal of congratulation from its ruined cellar. ‘To the Führer! The Sixth Army greet their Führer on the anniversary of your taking power. The swastika ɻag still ɻies over Stalingrad. May our struggle be an example to present and future generations never to surrender in hopeless situations so that Germany will be victorious in the end. Heil mein Führer! Paulus.’

This signal, grotesque in the circumstances, seems more likely to have been drafted and sent by General Schmidt. The words certainly had his ring to them. Paulus, at that stage, was ill from dysentery, shaken by events and demoralized, so it is not hard to imagine him just giving a nod of approval when shown the message form. Groscurth, for example, had reported in a letter not long before: ‘Paulus is in a state of physical and moral disintegration.’

On 30 January, the anniversary itself, Goering made a broadcast from the air ministry, comparing the Sixth Army to the Spartans at Thermopylae. This speech was not well received in Stalingrad, where it was listened to on radios. The fact that it was Goering, of all people, who was delivering ‘our own funeral speech’, heaped insult upon injury. Gottfried von Bismarck described the eʃect as ‘macabre’. In the theatre cellars in Stalingrad, which were packed with wounded, Goering’s voice was instantly recognized. ‘Turn it up!’ somebody shouted. ‘Switch it oʃ!’ yelled others, cursing him. The broadcast ɹnished with Bruckner’s Fifth Symphony. Some oɽcers joked bitterly that the ‘suicide of the Jews’ on the top of Masada might have been a more appropriate comparison than Thermopylae. They did not realize quite how accurate they were. Hitler was indeed counting on a mass suicide, above all of senior oɽcers.

Hitler’s own speech was delivered by Goebbels later on that anniversary day, having been delayed by RAF bombers. It rang with bitter deɹance, but the streak of self-justiɹcation was too raw to be hidden. He devoted only a single sentence to Stalingrad, the disaster which cast such a shadow over the regime’s day of celebration: ‘The heroic struggle of our soldiers on the Volga should be an exhortation to everyone to do his maximum in the struggle for Germany’s freedom and our nation’s future, and in a wider sense for the preservation of the whole of Europe.’ It was the ɹrst admission that from then on the Wehrmacht would be ɹghting to stave oʃ defeat.

The next day, Hitler, as if to oʃset any sense of disaster, created no fewer than four new ɹeld marshals, including Paulus. It was the largest group of senior promotions since the victory over France. When the signal came through announcing his promotion to General Field Marshal, Paulus guessed immediately that he had been presented with a cup of hemlock. He exclaimed to General Pfeʃer at his last generals’ conference: ‘I have no intention of shooting myself for this Bohemian corporal.’ Another general told his NKVD interrogator that Paulus had said: ‘It looks like an invitation to commit suicide, but I will not do this favour for him’. Paulus instinctively disapproved of suicide. When he heard that some of his men were choosing a ‘soldier’s suicide’ – standing on top of their trenchworks waiting to be shot down by the enemy – he gave orders to forbid the practice.

Hitler was not, of course, concerned with saving lives, he was interested only in creating potent myths. He clearly hoped that senior army oɽcers would follow the example of Admiral Lütjens on the Bismarck, a fantasy no doubt encouraged by news of the deaths of Generals von Hartmann and Stempel.

The reduction of the southern pocket continued rapidly. By 30 January, Soviet troops had penetrated right to the very centre of the city. In the cellars where the main mass of Germans sheltered from the cold and the artillery ɹre, there was a mood of despair and dread anticipation. In the old NKVD headquarters, the winter sky was visible through the smashed dome. The stone ɻoor was covered with rubble and fallen masonry, and the cage-like structure of stairs and railings was twisted. A red-cross ɻag outside the entrance enraged a German infantry oɽcer, who saw it as a signal of surrender. He went down to the cellar, where the doctors continued to operate in the light of a ɹeld-hospital gas-lamp, while they waited for the Russians to arrive. Gaunt and wild-eyed, the oɽcer threatened them with his sub-machine-gun. ‘What’s going on here? There’ll be no surrender! The war goes on!’ Many men were unbalanced by battle stress or hallucinations due to severe malnutrition. The cellars were ɹlled with men raving in delirium. Dr Markstein, a Danziger, just shrugged. ‘This is a dressing station,’ he said. The deranged warrior did not shoot them, he disappeared ghost-like back into the gloom without another word.

When General von Seydlitz, in the same building, released his divisional commanders on 25 January to decide for themselves whether or not to surrender, Paulus relieved him of his command. He placed all of Seydlitz’s divisions under General Walter Heitz, the commander of VIII Corps. Heitz then issued an order that anyone who attempted to surrender should be ɹred upon. When Seydlitz and over a dozen other oɽcers surrendered – they included Generals Pfeʃer, Korfes and Sanne – bursts of machine-gun ɹre were aimed at them from German lines as the Russians led them away. Seydlitz claimed later that two German oɽcers were mortally wounded as a result of Heitz’s ‘apocalyptic order’.

General Heitz, however, having given the order ‘We ɹght to the last bullet but one’, does not appear to have included himself and his headquarters in this rhetorical ɻourish. An oɽcer under his command remarked that his staʃ, almost certainly with his knowledge, had already prepared white ɻags.

Colonel Rosenfeld, the Luftwaʃe commander of 104th Flak Regiment, adopted the rhetoric expected by the regime. ‘The swastika ɻag ɻies above our heads,’ he signalled on the evening of 30 January. ‘The order of our supreme commander-in-chief will be followed to the last. Long live the Führer.’ That night Sixth Army headquarters sent a signal, warning that individual commanders were surrendering because their troops had no more ammunition, but also adopted similar ɻourishes to those of Rosenfeld, claiming that they were ‘listening to the national anthem for the last time with arms raised in the German salute’. Again, this sounds more like Schmidt’s style than that of Paulus. Whatever the truth, few soldiers had either the wish or the energy to share such emotions. ‘During that night of 30 January’, recorded a sergeant, ‘each man was preoccupied with his own thoughts, with gnawing uncertainty, with painful wounds and frostbite, with thoughts of home, and with our fate.’ Oɽcers especially expected execution. Many removed their badges of rank.

In the middle of that same night, General Voronov in his izba at Don Front headquarters awoke in a panic from a restless sleep. The idea had suddenly come to him that Paulus might escape on an aircraft landing on the ice of the Volga. Stalin’s reaction to the loss of such a prize was evidently not hard to imagine. He jumped out of bed at once and telephoned to give orders for guns along the east bank at Stalingrad to be trained on the ice as a precaution.

By early next morning, 31 January 1943, Shumilov’s 64th Army had secured virtually all of the centre of Stalingrad. Ruined buildings and cellars had been cleared with grenade and ɻamethrower. Red Square was subjected to an intense mortar and artillery bombardment, before Russian soldiers moved in on the Univermag department store. Roske’s remaining grenadiers above Paulus’s headquarters in the basement ɹnally laid down their weapons. At 7.35 a.m., Captain Behr on Milch’s staʃ received the signal: ‘Russians at the entrance. We are preparing to surrender.’ Ten minutes later, as Senior Lieutenant Fyodor Ilchenko went down into the packed and stinking basement, came the signal: ‘We are surrendering.’ Behr then passed on the message to Manstein’s headquarters at Army Group Don. Back in Germany, the oɽcial communiqué announced: ‘In Stalingrad the situation is unchanged. The defenders’ spirit is unbroken.’

Staʃ oɽcers from General Shumilov’s headquarters arrived to discuss surrender terms with General Schmidt in the basement. Paulus remained in an adjoining room, while Adam kept him informed of every step. Whether this was a ploy to allow Paulus to distance himself from the surrender, or a further example of Schmidt handling events because Paulus was in a state of virtual collapse, is not clear. Finally, two hours after Lieutenant Ilchenko’s appearance, General Laskin arrived to take Paulus’s formal surrender, before he, Schmidt and Adam, were taken to Shumilov’s headquarters by staʃ car, as General Roske had apparently insisted. Like their men, the three men who emerged into the sunlight had incipient beards, even if their faces were not quite as cadaverous as those of their soldiers. Colonel Adam, Vasily Grossman noted, had the ɻaps of his ushanka fur hat down ‘like the ears of a pedigree dog just out of the water’. Newsreel cameramen were waiting to record the event.

Those still in the cellars of the city centre waited until Red Army soldiers appeared. Waving the barrels of their sub-machine-guns, they ordered the Germans to throw their weapons in a corner and ɹle out. The defeated made ready for captivity by wrapping the rags from torn-up uniforms round their boots. Some German soldiers called out ‘Hitler kaputt!’ as a signal of surrender. Russian soldiers might reply ‘Kameraden, Krieg kaputt! Paulus kapituliert!,’ but mostly they shouted ‘Faschist!’ or ‘Fritz! Κomm! Komm!’

When Soviet troops entered the theatre cellars, they gave the order: ‘Whoever’s capable of walking, get outside to be marched to a prison camp.’ Those who set oʃ assumed that the wounded left behind would be looked after. They discovered only later that the Red Army operated on the principle that those prisoners who could not march were ɹnished oʃ where they lay.

In one or two cases, rage and despair produced an explosive mixture. In the NKVD building, every German expected to be shot in reprisal, after an oɽcer, who had concealed his pistol, suddenly shot a Russian major at point-blank range, then turned the gun on himself. Somehow the moment of anger among the Russian troops passed, and the prisoners were spared.

The surrender at Stalingrad produced a volatility in which the fate of a German was utterly unpredictable. Soviet soldiers, whether deliberately or by accident, set ɹre to the improvised hospital full of wounded in the pioneer barracks by the airɹeld. Two Luftwaʃe ɻak oɽcers, who had been escorted to an upstairs room by Russian soldiers, in the belief that the red patches on their collars signiɹed high rank, escaped by jumping out of a shattered window. They landed by the latrine, and when soldiers appeared ready to shoot them, the younger lieutenant saved both their lives by quick thinking and acute psychology. He told his companion to pull down his trousers. The Russians laughed and spared them. They could not shoot men with their trousers down.

The NKVD Special Department groups were searching for Hiwis and also for ‘fascist dogs’, by which they meant ‘SS, Gestapo, panzer troops, and Feldgendarmerie’. A number of German soldiers, wrongly identiɹed as SS, who laughed at the suggestion, were pushed to one side and executed with sub-machine-guns. Apparently Red Army soldiers from a Siberian division turned away in disgust from the spectacle. The same account, based on the interrogation six months later of a woman Soviet intelligence oɽcer by the Secret Field Police, records the execution of a group of twenty-three Hiwis.

The NKVD’s search for Hiwis was relentless. Any man not in full German uniform risked being shot on the spot, as one battalion commander from the 297th Infantry Division discovered. ‘Soviet soldiers suddenly stopped us, and because of my lack of uniform and cap, wanted to shoot me as a “Hiwi”. Only a doctor’s knowledge of Russian saved me.’

A considerable number of Hiwis proved loyal to the Germans right to the end. In the ruins of Stalingrad just before the surrender, some soldiers from the 305th Infantry Division were starving. The Hiwis with them disappeared, and they thought that they had seen the last of them, but the Russians returned with food for them. Where they had found it, they would not say. The loyalty of these Russians was not always reciprocated, however. Shortly before the surrender, one oɽcer was asked by his warrant oɽcer: ‘What shall we do with our eight Hiwis? Should I shoot them?’ The lieutenant, taken aback at such cold-bloodedness, rejected the idea. He told the Hiwis to hide or slip out as best they could. They were on their own.

The fate of the Hiwis rounded up at the end of the battle of Stalingrad is still unclear, partly because the ɹles of the 10th NKVD Division remain ɹrmly closed. There is no way of knowing how many had died during ten weeks of encirclement and the last three weeks of intense ɹghting. Some were shot on capture, a handful were used as interpreters and informers, then almost certainly killed later, but most were marched oʃ by the NKVD. Even members of Red Army intelligence did not know what happened to them afterwards. They may well have been massacred – there were accounts later of captured Hiwis being beaten to death, rather than shot, to save ammunition – but in the early part of 1943 the Soviet regime wanted to increase its force of slave labour, especially when it was transferring Gulag prisoners to shtraf companies. A solution of working Hiwis to death certainly oʃered a more vicious revenge since it would have protracted their suʃering. On the other hand, both Stalin and Beria were so obsessed with treason that only instant death might have satisɹed them.

During the last few days of the battle, the Soviet military authorities were increasingly anxious to prevent small groups escaping their net. Three German oɽcers in Red Army uniform, led by a lieutenant-colonel, were captured on 27 January. A Russian lieutenant from a tank regiment cornered another two oɽcers, and was wounded when they ɹred at him. Of the nine or ten groups of Germans estimated to have broken out of the ring, none of them appear to have escaped, but by then Army Group Don had been forced back beyond the river Donets, over 200 miles from the Kessel. There is, however, an unconɹrmed and unconvincing story of a soldier who did make it, but was killed next day when a bomb hit the ɹeld hospital in which he was being treated for exhaustion and frostbite. Others are said to have tried to escape southwards out into the steppe and seek shelter with the Kalmyks, who had been friendly, but the Kalmyks themselves, like numerous other peoples from the southern regions of the Soviet Union, soon attracted the revenge of Beria’s NKVD.

Russian soldiers from front-line units, especially Guards divisions, are said to have been more correct in their treatment of the vanquished than second-line units. But some drunken soldiers, celebrating victory, shot prisoners, despite orders to the contrary. Even members of elite formations rapidly stripped their captives of watches, rings and cameras, as well as the Wehrmacht’s highly prized mess tins in aluminium. Many of these items would then be bartered for vodka. In some cases a decent pair of jackboots would be seized oʃ a prisoner, who would be thrown the Russian’s decrepit cast-oʃs in return. One doctor lost his prized copy of Faust, a small leather-bound edition printed on onion paper, which a Russian soldier wanted for rolling makhorka cigarettes. Blankets were also snatched oʃ backs, sometimes just for the satisfaction of revenge because the Germans had taken the warm clothes of so many Russian civilians.

As the gaunt prisoners stumbled out of cellars and bunkers, their hands held high in surrender, their eyes searched for a piece of wood that could serve as a crutch. Many were suʃering from such bad frostbite that they could hardly walk. Almost everyone had lost toenails, if not toes. Soviet oɽcers observed that the Romanian soldiers were in an even worse state than the Germans. Apparently their rations had been cut oʃ earlier in an attempt to maintain German strength.

The prisoners kept their eyes down, not daring to look at their guards or the ring of emaciated civilians who had emerged from the ruins in such astonishing numbers. All around, odd shots broke the silence of the former battleɹeld. Those in bunkers sounded muʀed. Nobody knew whether each report signiɹed the end of a soldier found hiding, of one who had oʃered resistance in some way, or of a severely wounded soldier receiving the coup de grâce.

These defeated remnants of the Sixth Army, without weapons or helmets, wearing woollen caps pulled down or even just rags wrapped round their heads against the hard frost, shivering in their inadequate greatcoats fastened with signal cable as a belt, were herded into long columns of march. A group of survivors from the 297th Infantry Division was confronted by a Russian oɽcer, who pointed at the ruins around and yelled at them: ‘That’s how Berlin is going to look!’ Field Marshal Paulus, accompanied by Lieutenant Lev Bezyminsky of Red Army intelligence, was driven from 64th Army headquarters in his own staʃ car to Don Front headquarters outside Zavarykino, some ɹfty miles from Stalingrad. Schmidt and Adam followed under escort in another car. They were shown to their quarters, another ɹve-walled izba. A permanent guard detachment under Lieutenant C. M. Bogomolov awaited them. The other ‘Stalingrad generals’ were brought to another izba close by, where they were watched by Lieutenant Spektor and a platoon of men.

Bogomolov and his men, keenly conscious of the historic moment, eyed their charges with fascination. The tall Paulus had to duck low on entering. Following Adam’s example, he had abandoned his dress cap for an ushanka fur hat. He still wore the uniform of a colonelgeneral. Paulus was followed by General Schmidt and Colonel Adam, who impressed the guards by his ‘rather good command of Russian’. Paulus’s soldier driver came last carrying their heavy suitcases. The Mercedes staʃ car was promptly appropriated by General W. I. Kazakov, the Front artillery commander.

Paulus and Schmidt occupied the inner room of the izba, while Colonel Adam and the escort were quartered in the outer room. They were joined by two NKVD agents sent from Moscow by Beria. Late in the evening, General Malinin, the front chief of staʃ, and Colonel Yakimovich, a senior staʃ oɽcer, arrived. Bezyminsky, acting as interpreter, informed Paulus and Schmidt that their task was to search their luggage for ‘forbidden articles’, which included all sharp metal objects. Schmidt exploded. ‘A German Field Marshal’, he yelled, ‘does not commit suicide with a pair of nail scissors!’ Paulus, who was exhausted, signalled to him with a wave of the hand not to bother, and handed over his shaving kit.

Shortly before midnight, Paulus was told that the Red Army commanders were now assembled and waiting to interview him. Lieutenant Yevgeny Tarabrin, the German-speaking NKVD oɽcer sent to escort him everywhere, heard Paulus whisper to Schmidt, as he helped him into his overcoat: ‘What should I say?’ ‘Remember you are a General Field Marshal of the German Army,’ Schmidt is said to have hissed back. More surprising, and most signiɹcant to the ears of Red Army intelligence, the Russian oɽcer reported that Schmidt used the du intimate form of address to his

superior.* 

Only half an hour before the meeting began, Captain Dyatlenko of the NKVD received orders to report to the izba used by Marshal Voronov, who had just been promoted by Stalin. ‘So Captain,’ Voronov greeted him aʃably. ‘You no doubt remember the time the old man didn’t want to receive you. Well, now he’s visiting us himself. And you’re going to receive him.’

Voronov was sitting at the table with General Rokossovsky, the front commander, and General K. F. Telegin, the front commissar. A photographer appeared wearing a fur-lined ɻying jacket. To Dyatlenko’s astonishment, he treated Voronov with relaxed familiarity. It transpired that this was the famous documentary ɹlm-maker Roman Karmen, who had become friendly with Voronov during the Spanish Civil War. Karmen lined up the chair destined for Paulus, to get the right shot through the door from Voronov’s bedroom. He knew that the result was to be used to tell the world of the Soviet Union’s great

victory.* 

The atmosphere was tense in Voronov’s izba when their ‘guest’ arrived. The tall, thin, stooping Paulus presented a grey ɹgure, with his ‘mouse-coloured’ uniform and face ashen from nervous strain. His hair was turning to ‘pepper and salt’, and even the growth of beard was black and white. Only when Paulus approached the table did Voronov indicate the empty chair. ‘Sit down, please,’ he said in Russian. Dyatlenko jumped to his feet, and interpreted. Paulus made a half-bow and sat down. Dyatlenko then introduced the two Soviet commanders. ‘The Representative of the Stavka, Marshal of Artillery Voronov! Commander of the Don Front, Colonel-General Rokossovsky!’ Paulus jerked to his feet and made half-bows in each man’s direction. Voronov began to speak, pausing every few moments for Dyatlenko to translate. ‘Herr Colonel-General, it is rather late and you must be tired. We have also been working a lot during the last few days. This is why we will now discuss just one problem which is urgent.’

‘Excuse me,’ Paulus broke in, taking Dyatlenko oʃ balance. ‘But I am not a colonel-general. The day before yesterday, my headquarters received a signal saying that I had been promoted to general ɹeld marshal. It is also written in my military identity papers.’ He touched the breast pocket of his tunic. ‘It was not possible, however, to change my uniform in the circumstances.’

Voronov and Rokossovsky exchanged glances of ironical amusement. General Shumilov had already informed Don Front head-quarters of Paulus’s last-minute promotion.

‘So, Herr General Field Marshal’, Voronov resumed, ‘we are asking you to sign an order addressed to the part of your army which still resists, telling them to surrender to prevent the useless loss of life.’

‘It would be unworthy of a soldier!’ Paulus burst out before Dyatlenko had ɹnished his translation.

‘Is it possible to say’, asked Voronov, ‘that to save the lives of your subordinates is behaviour unworthy of a soldier when the commander himself has surrendered?’

‘I didn’t surrender. I was taken by surprise.’

This ‘naive’ reply did not impress the Russian oɽcers, who were well aware of the circumstances of the surrender. ‘We are talking of a humanitarian act,’ Voronov continued. ‘It will take us only a couple of days or even just a few hours to destroy the rest of your troops who continue to ɹght on. Resistance is useless. It will only cause the unnecessary deaths of thousands of soldiers. Your duty as an army commander is to save their lives, and this is even more the case because you yourself saved your life by surrendering.’

Paulus, who had been playing nervously with the packet of cigarettes and ashtray laid on the table for his use, shirked the question by sticking to formulae. ‘Even if I did sign such an order, they won’t obey. If I have surrendered, I automatically cease to be their commander.’

‘But a few hours ago you were their commander.’

‘Since my troops were split into two groups,’ Paulus persisted, ‘I was the commander of the other pocket only in theory. Orders came separately from Führer headquarters and each group was commanded by a diʃerent general.’

The argument went ‘round and round in circles’. Paulus’s nervous tic was even more pronounced, and Voronov too, knowing that Stalin was waiting in the Kremlin to hear the result, began to show the strain. His upper lip twitched, the legacy of a car crash in Belorussia. Paulus, in his blocking tactics, even claimed that if he did sign the paper, it would be regarded as a forgery. Voronov replied that, in that case, they would have one of his own generals brought over to witness the signature, and he would be sent into the north Kessel with the paper to guarantee its authenticity. But Paulus, however lame his arguments sounded, stuck to his refusal to sign. Voronov ɹnally had to accept that any further attempt to persuade him was useless.

‘I must inform you, Herr General Field Marshal,’ Dyatlenko translated, ‘that by your refusal to save the lives of your subordinates, you are taking on a heavy responsibility for the German people and the future of Germany.’ Paulus stared at the wall, depressed and silent. In this ‘tormented pose’ only the tic in his face indicated his thoughts.

Voronov then brought the interview to a close by asking Paulus if his lodging was satisfactory, and whether he needed a special diet because of his illness. ‘The only thing I would like to request,’ Paulus replied, ‘is to feed the many prisoners of war, and to give them medical attention.’ Voronov explained that ‘the situation at the front made it diɽcult to receive and cope with such a mass of prisoners’, but that they would do all they could. Paulus thanked him, stood up and gave another half-bow. Hitler heard the news at the heavily guarded Wolfsschanze deep in the East Prussian forest, a place once described by General Jodl as a cross between a monastery and a concentration camp. He did not bang the table this time, he stared silently into his soup.

His voice and anger returned the next day. Field Marshal Keitel and Generals Jeschonnek, Jodl and Zeitzler were all summoned to the Führer’s midday conference. ‘They have surrendered there formally and absolutely,’ said Hitler in angry disbelief. ‘Otherwise they would have closed ranks, formed a hedgehog, and shot themselves with their last bullet. When you consider that a woman has the pride to leave, to lock herself in, and to shoot herself right away just because she has heard a few insulting remarks, then I can’t have any respect for a soldier who is afraid of that and prefers to go into captivity.’

‘I can’t understand it either,’ replied Zeitzler, whose performance on this occasion makes one wonder about his assurances to Manstein and others that he had done everything to convince the Führer of the true situation regarding the Sixth Army. ‘I’m still of the opinion that it might not be true; perhaps he is lying there badly wounded.’

Hitler kept coming back again and again to Paulus’s failure to commit suicide. Clearly, it had entirely sullied the myth of Stalingrad in his imagination. ‘This hurts me so much because the heroism of so many soldiers is nulliɹed by one single characterless weakling… What is Life? Life is the Nation. The individual must die anyway… What hurts me most, personally, is that I still promoted him to ɹeld marshal. I wanted to give him this ɹnal satisfaction. He could have freed himself from all sorrow and ascended into eternity and national immortality, but he prefers to go to Moscow.’

The northern pocket, with the remnants of six divisions under General Strecker, still held out. Strecker, with the headquarters of XI Corps in the Stalingrad tractor plant, signalled: ‘Troops are ɹghting without heavy weapons or supplies. Men collapsing from exhaustion. Freezing to death still holding weapons. Strecker.’ His message was robust, but conspicuously avoided Nazi clichés. Hitler, who received the signal after the meeting with Zeitzler, replied late in the afternoon: ‘I expect the north Kessel to hold out to the last.’ To emphasize the point still further, he issued a Führer directive a short time later: ‘XI Army Corps must resist to the last to tie down as much enemy strength as possible to facilitate operations on other fronts.’

The four Soviet armies had redeployed rapidly to crush the last pocket. With a concentration of 300 ɹeld guns to just over half a mile, the factory district was smashed once again. Any surviving bunkers were destroyed at point-blank range, some with ɹeld guns, some with ɻame-throwers, sometimes with tanks driving right up and sticking their barrel into an embrasure.

Strecker believed that, purely to help Manstein, there was a military purpose served by ɹghting on, but he utterly rejected any idea of self-destruction for propaganda purposes. In his mind, there was no doubt where the duties of an oɽcer lay, as a conversation with a regimental adjutant shortly before the end showed.

‘When the time comes,’ the adjutant assured him, ‘we will commit suicide.’

‘Suicide?’ exclaimed Strecker.

‘Yes, Herr General! My colonel will also shoot himself. He believes we should not allow ourselves to be captured.’

‘Well let me tell you something. You will not shoot yourself, nor will your colonel shoot himself. You will go into captivity along with your men and will do everything you can to set a good example.’

‘You mean…’, the young oɽcer’s eyes lit up, ‘I don’t have to shoot myself.’

Strecker spent most of the night of 1 February at the regimental headquarters of an old friend, Colonel Julius Müller. A single candle burned in one corner of the bunker as the small group present talked about the recent ɹghting, past friends and the imprisonment ahead. ‘No one mentions all the suʃering,’ Strecker noted, ‘no one speaks bitterly.’ In the early hours of the morning, Strecker stood up. ‘Müller, I have to go,’ he said. ‘May you and your men go with God.’ Strecker was greatly taken with Thomas Carlyle’s description of God as ‘the true Field Marshal’. No doubt, his vision of heaven was a place of perfect military order.

‘We will do our duty, Herr General,’ Müller replied as the two men shook hands.

Strecker had already rejected the requests of his divisional commanders to surrender, but at four in the morning of 2 February, Generals von Lenski and Lattmann asked Strecker once more for permission. Strecker refused again. Lenski then said that one of his oɽcers had already left to negotiate terms with the Russians. Strecker saw no point in continuing. He and Groscurth drafted their ɹnal signal. ‘XI Army Corps has with its six divisions performed its duty down to the last man in heavy ɹghting. Long live Germany!’ It was received by Army Group Don. Strecker asserted later that he and Groscurth had deliberately omitted any acclamation of Hitler, but the version recorded and then sent on to East Prussia ended with ‘Long live the Führer!’ Somebody must have thought it politic to make the signal more palatable at the Wolfsschanze.

When two Russian soldiers appeared looking rather hesitant at the entrance of the command bunker, Groscurth shouted at them to fetch a general. Strecker wrote afterwards that many of their own soldiers were ‘only barely alive’.

Foreign journalists were taken on a tour of the factory district a few days later. ‘What the normal relief of the terrain had been no one could tell,’ wrote the British correspondent, Alexander Werth. ‘You wound your way up and down, up and down; what was a natural slope, or what was the side of a dozen bomb-craters that had merged into one, no one could say. Trenches ran through the factory yards; through the workshops themselves; at the bottom of the trenches there still lay frozen green Germans and frozen grey Russians and frozen fragments of human shape, and there were tin helmets, German and Russian, lying among the brick debris, and the helmets were half-ɹlled with snow. There was barbed wire here, and half-uncovered mines, and shell cases, and more rubble, and fragments of walls, and tortuous tangles of rusty steel girders. How anyone could have survived here was hard to imagine.’

The morning of 2 February began with a thick mist, which was later dispersed by sun and a wind which whipped up the powdery snow. As news of the ɹnal surrender spread among the 62nd Army, signal ɻares were ɹred into the sky in an impromptu display. Sailors from the Volga ɻotilla and soldiers from the left bank crossed the ice with loaves of bread and tins of food for the civilians who had been trapped for ɹve months in cellars and holes.

Groups and individuals walking about embraced those they met in wonder. Voices were subdued in the frozen air. There was no shortage of ɹgures in the colourless landscape of ruins, yet the city felt deserted and dead. The end was hardly unexpected, or even sudden, yet the Russian defenders found it hard to believe that the battle of Stalingrad had ɹnally come to an end. When they thought about it, and remembered the dead, their own survival astonished them. Out of each division sent across the Volga, no more than a few hundred men survived. In the whole Stalingrad campaign, the Red Army had suʃered 1.1 million casualties, of which 485,751 had been fatal.

Grossman looked back over the last ɹve months. ‘I thought of the wide dirt road leading to the ɹshermen’s village on the bank of the Volga – a road of glory and death – and the silent columns marching along it in the choking dust of August, in the moonlit nights of September, in the drenching rains of October, in the snows of November. They had marched with a heavy step – anti-tank men, machine-gunners, simple infantrymen – they had marched with a grim and solemn silence. The only sound that had come from their ranks was the clank of their weapons and their measured tread.’

Very little that was recognizable remained from the city which had existed before Richthofen’s bombers appeared on that August afternoon. Stalingrad was now little more than a battered and burned skeleton. About the only landmark left standing was the fountain with statues of little boys and girls dancing round it. This seemed an unsettling miracle after so many thousands of children had perished in the ruins all around.

OceanofPDF.com 23

‘Stop Dancing! Stalingrad Has Fallen’

At midday on 2 February a Luftwaʃe reconnaissance aircraft circled over the city. The pilot’s radio message was immediately passed to Field Marshal Milch: ‘No more sign of ɹghting in Stalingrad’.

After Voronov and Rokossovsky’s ɹrst interview with Paulus, Captain Dyatlenko returned to interrogating the other captured generals. Contrary to his expectations, they reacted in very diʃerent ways. General Schlömer, who had taken over command of XIV Panzer Corps from Hube, arrived limping on a stick and wearing a Red Army padded jacket. He won over his interrogator with an easy charm and remarks about ‘the Corporal uneducated in military problems’ and the ‘untalented careerists in his entourage’. General Walther von Seydlitz, on the other hand, whom the NKVD ‘later discovered to be the most energetic defender of disobedience to the Fürer during the encirclement’, conducted himself ‘in a very reserved way’.

For Stalin, 91,000 prisoners, including twenty-two German generals, were better trophies than ɻags or guns. Paulus, still in a state of shock, at ɹrst refused to appear in front of the journalists brought down from Moscow. ‘We have our own rules,’ retorted Colonel Yakimovich of Don Front headquarters, with Lieutenant Bezyminsky interpreting. ‘You are to do what you are told.’ One compromise was, however, permitted. Paulus would not have to answer questions from the journalists, he only had to show himself to prove that he had not committed suicide.

The foreign correspondents were rather surprised by the appearance of the German generals. ‘They looked healthy, and not in the least undernourished,’ wrote Alexander Werth. ‘Clearly, throughout the agony of Stalingrad, when their soldiers were dying of hunger, they were continuing to have more or less regular meals. The only man who looked in poor shape was Paulus himself. He looked pale and sick, and had a nervous twitch in his left cheek.’

Attempts to put questions were not very successful. ‘It was rather like being at the zoo,’ wrote Werth, ‘where some animals showed interest in the public and others sulked.’ General Deboi was clearly keen to please, and immediately told the foreign journalists – ‘as if to ask us not to be frightened’ – that he was Austrian. General Schlömer was the most relaxed. He turned to one of his captors and, patting the oɽcer’s shoulder boards, which had just been reintroduced by Stalin, exclaimed with a comic look of surprise: ‘What – new?’ General von Arnim, on the other hand, was chieɻy preoccupied with the fate of his luggage and what he thought of Red Army soldiers as a result. ‘The oɽcers behave very correctly,’ he announced, but the soldiers he described as ‘impudent thieves!’

The strain of capture also made for undigniɹed behaviour in the two peasant houses at Zavarykino. Adam deliberately provoked Senior Lieutenant Bogomolov one morning with a Nazi salute and a ‘Heil Hitler’. Schmidt, however, was the oɽcer most disliked by the Russians. Bogomolov forced him to apologize to a mess waitress whom he had reduced to tears as she served their lunch. A few days later, trouble broke out across the way in the izba which housed the other generals. Lieutenant Spektor of guard group No. 2 telephoned Bogomolov, begging him to come quickly. A ɹght had broken out. ‘When I opened the door of the house,’ wrote Bogomolov, ‘I saw that a German general was grasping the wrist of a Romanian general. When the German saw me, he let go, and then the Romanian hit him in the mouth. It turned out that the quarrel was about the Romanian’s knife, fork and spoon, which he claimed that the German had tried to take.’ Bogomolov, in contemptuous disbelief, sarcastically warned Lieutenant Spektor ‘that if he allowed such behaviour to continue, he too would have his spoon conɹscated’.

Latent rivalries and dislikes between generals had come out into the open. Heitz and Seydlitz loathed each other even more after Seydlitz had allowed his divisional commanders to make their own decisions about surrender. Heitz, who had ordered his soldiers to ɹght to ‘the last cartridge but one’, had himself surrendered, and then accepted dinner from General Shumilov at 64th Army headquarters. He also spent the night there. When he ɹnally joined the other captured generals at Zavarykino, there was an uproar because he arrived with several suitcases packed ready for imprisonment. When tackled about his order to ɹght to the end, he replied that he would have committed suicide, but his chief of staʃ had prevented him.

For the Wehrmacht, it was a time of counting the cost. Field Marshal Milch’s staʃ estimated that they had lost 488 transport planes and 1,000 crew members during the airlift. The 9th Flak Division was destroyed, along with other ground personnel, to say nothing of Fourth Air Fleet’s losses in bombers, ɹghters and Stukas, during the campaign.

The army’s exact losses are still uncertain, but there was no doubt that the Stalingrad campaign represented the most catastrophic defeat hitherto experienced in German history. The Sixth Army and the Fourth Panzer Army had eʃectively been destroyed. In the Kessel alone some 60,000 had died since the start of Operation Uranus and around 130,000 had been captured. (Again the confusion over statistics appears to be due mainly to the numbers of Russians in German uniform.) These ɹgures do not take into account the losses in and around Stalingrad between August and November, the destruction of four allied armies, the defeat of Manstein’s rescue attempt and the losses inɻicted by Operation Little Saturn. Altogether, the Axis must have lost over half a million men.

Presenting such a catastrophe to the German people was a challenge to which Goebbels had risen with frenetic energy, using all his talent for shameless distortion. The regime had not admitted that the Sixth Army was encircled until 16 January, when it spoke of ‘our troops who for several weeks have been heroically ɹghting enemy attacks on all sides’. Now, it chose entirely the opposite direction, claiming that not a single man had survived. Goebbels mobilized wireless stations and press to unite the country in martial grief. His instructions to newspapers on how they were to portray the tragedy poured forth. They must remember that every word about this dramatic struggle would go down in history. The press must always employ the word Bolshevik, not Russian. ‘The whole of German propaganda must create a myth out of the heroism of Stalingrad which is to become one of the most treasured possessions in German history.’ The Wehrmacht communiqué, in particular, must be phrased in a way ‘which will move hearts for centuries to come’. It had to rank with Caesar’s address to his troops, with Frederick the Great’s appeal to his generals before the battle of Leuthen and with Napoleon’s call to his imperial guard.

The communiqué was broadcast as a special announcement on the wireless twenty-four hours after Strecker’s surrender. ‘From Führer headquarters, 3 February 1943. The supreme command of the Wehrmacht announces that the battle of Stalingrad has come to an end. True to its oath of allegiance, the Sixth Army under the exemplary leadership of Field Marshal Paulus has been annihilated by the overwhelming superiority of enemy numbers… The sacriɹce of the Sixth Army was not in vain. As the bulwark of our historic European mission, it has held out against the onslaught of six Soviet armies… They died so that Germany might live.’

The regime’s lies proved counter-productive, especially the idea that every member of the Sixth Army had died. No reference was made in any announcement to the 91,000 prisoners already proclaimed by the Soviet government, an item of news that had been rapidly broadcast all round the world. Inevitably, many more people than usual tuned into foreign stations.

A period of three days’ national mourning was ordered, with places of entertainment closed and all wireless stations playing solemn music, yet the newspapers were forbidden black margins and no ɻags were to be ɻown at half mast.

The Security Service of the SS did not underestimate the eʃect on civilian morale. They also knew that letters from the Kessel, describing the horror and the squalor, fundamentally contradicted the regime’s heroic treatment of the disaster. ‘The farewell letters of Stalingrad combatants’, ran one report, ‘spread great spiritual distress not only to relatives but also to a wider circle of the population, the more so because the content of these letters was passed round rapidly. The description of the suʃering during the last weeks of ɹghting haunts relatives day and night.’ Goebbels had, in fact, foreseen this problem much earlier, and decided to intercept postcards from those taken prisoner. In his diary on 17 December he wrote: ‘In future, cards to relatives should no longer be delivered, because they oʃer an access door to Germany for Bolshevik propaganda.’

Soviet eʃorts proved too energetic to stop. The NKVD’s prison camps provided postcards, but because the German authorities would not allow them in, their contents were printed in small type, many to a sheet, and dropped over German lines as propaganda leaɻets. When these were dropped, German soldiers at the front picked them up, although they risked severe punishment, and sent anonymous letters to the addresses on the list to say that their man was alive. They signed themselves ‘a compatriot’ or just ‘χχχ’. Sometimes, to the horror of the Nazi authorities, families even received a copy of the Soviet leaɻet and contacted others in the same situation.

Paul’s himself seems to have sensed before the surrender that the regime might try to twist the Stalingrad disaster into a new version of the stab-in-the-back myth. (Whether this inɻuenced his decision to refuse the surrender terms on 9 January is impossible to say.) This time, however, the scapegoats for defeat would not be Communists and Jews as in 1918, but the general staʃ and the aristocracy, still closely associated in the popular mind. Those about to come into the line of ɹre had an inkling of the storm ahead.

Otto, Fürst von Bismarck, the German minister at the embassy in Rome, slipped away with his wife for a holiday at the end of January to avoid the oɽcial celebrations of the Nazi regime’s tenth anniversary. Like most German diplomats away from Berlin, he had little idea of the true horrors of the Stalingrad debacle. On the evening of 31 January, they were in the Palace Hotel in St Moritz when an urgent telephone call from the German ambassador in Berne was put through. ‘Stop dancing!’ the ambassador warned. ‘Stalingrad has fallen.’ They both knew that St Moritz had become the favourite resort of senior oɽcers from the SS. Nothing more needed to be said.

The propaganda ministry’s party line about general and grenadier ɹghting shoulder to shoulder soon changed. On 18 February, Goebbels organized a mass rally in the Berlin Sportpalast, with the theme ‘Total War – Shortest War!’ A huge banderol carried the great call of 1812: ‘Let Our War-Cry be: Now the People Rise Up and Storm Break Loose’. The very diʃerent historical contexts made this glaringly inappropriate to all but the most committed supporter of the regime.

‘Do you want total war?’ Goebbels yelled from the podium. His audience bayed its response. ‘Are you determined to follow the Führer and ɹght for victory whatever the cost?’ Once again the party faithful roared.

Goebbels, during the weeks following Stalingrad, set the agenda. He demanded an end to half-measures, with mass mobilization, yet symbolism was almost more important in the rash of measures. The copper cladding over the Brandenburg Gate was removed for use in war industry. Professional sporting events were banned. Luxury shops, including jewellers, were closed. All fashion magazines were to cease publication. Goebbels even organized a campaign against fashion, with the notion that women did not need to dress up, because they would please ‘victorious homecoming soldiers just as much in patches’. Rumours spread that permanent waving would be forbidden. Hitler, who passionately believed that it was the duty of womankind to be decorative, objected to this, and Goebbels was forced to announce that ‘there is no need for a woman to make herself ugly’. Barter, that ɹrst sign of a siege economy, spread rapidly. Scrubbing-brushes, for example, were soon exchanged for tickets to a Furtwängler concert. Nightclubs and luxury restaurants, such as Horcher and the Quartier Latin, Neva Grill, Peltzers Atelier and the Tuskulum in the Kurfürstendamm, were closed. When they reopened, customers were to be encouraged to restrict themselves to Feldküchengerichte – ‘ɹeld kitchen dishes’ – as an act of solidarity with the soldiers in Russia, quite probably an idea inspired by Zeitzler’s forbidden fast. Goering, however, arranged that Horcher, his favourite restaurant, was reopened as an oɽcers’ club for the Luftwaʃe.

The barely veiled message that corrupt, upper-class generals had betrayed the Nazi ideal was conveyed in numerous ways. Not long afterwards, all members of German royal families serving in the armed forces were told to resign their commissions. Even riding in the Tiergarten was stopped.

More and more Nazi propaganda slogans appeared on walls, but cynical Berliners preferred the graɽti: ‘Enjoy the war, the peace will be much worse.’ ‘Hold out’ became the most overused word in the propaganda lexicon. A fear grew for the future, above all of Russia’s determination to wreak a violent revenge. An innkeeper from the Black Forest on leave from the Ostfront said to Christabel Bielenberg: ‘If we are paid back one quarter of what we are doing in Russia and Poland, Frau Doktor, we will suʃer, and we will deserve to suʃer.’

Germans who did not admire the Nazis recognized the grotesque paradox only too clearly. The invasion of the Soviet Union had forced the Russians to defend Stalinism. Now the threat of defeat forced Germans to defend Hitler’s regime and its ghastly failure. The diʃerence was that the Russians had had a vast land mass into which to retreat, while Germany faced war on two fronts, massive bombing raids and a blockade. To make matters worse, Roosevelt and Churchill at Casablanca had declared their intention to ɹght on until the unconditional surrender of the Axis. This strengthened Goebbels’s hand immeasurably.

The opposition, for a variety of reasons ranging from irresolution and disagreement to sheer bad luck, had not managed to act in time. It was already far too late to convince the Allies that there was a democratic alternative to the Nazi regime, as opposed to a palace coup by generals afraid of defeat. Its members, although well aware of this, still hoped that Stalingrad would at least provide the trigger for revolt, but no army group commander was prepared to move. Less senior, but much more determined, oɽcers were ready to take huge risks, if necessary to lose their own lives in the attempt, but Hitler, who seemed to possess an almost feral nose for danger, was too well guarded, and constantly changed his plans at the last moment.

The only overt sign of disaʃection following the collapse at Stalingrad came from a small group of Munich students, known as the White Rose. Their ideas spread to other students in Hamburg, Berlin, Stuttgart and Vienna. On 18 February, after a campaign of leaɻets and slogans painted on walls calling for the overthrow of Nazism, Sophie Scholl and her brother Hans were arrested after scattering more handbills at the Ludwig-Maximilian University in Munich. Tortured by the Gestapo, then sentenced to death by Roland Freisler at a special session of the People’s Court in Munich, brother and sister were beheaded. A number of other members of their circle, including the professor of philosophy, Kurt Huber, suʃered similar fates.

Soon after the ɹnal surrender at Stalingrad, Hitler saw Field Marshal von Manstein, the ɹrst senior oɽcer from outside his immediate circle. Manstein outlined the measures he had been forced to take to avoid total collapse in southern Russia. Hitler wanted to order him not to withdraw any further, but Manstein knew that, in the circumstances, he could set the terms. During their discussions, Hitler said that he alone took the responsibility for Stalingrad, then promptly sidestepped his own confession by adding that he could put some of the blame on Goering, but since he had appointed the Reichsmarschall to be his successor, he could not hold him responsible for Stalingrad. No mention was made of his own confused strategy and attempts to control operations from afar. His greatest recriminations were still reserved for Paulus. He told Goebbels that after the war he would have Paulus and his generals court-martialled for failing to carry out his explicit order to resist to the last bullet.

Hitler now seldom held forth at table, as had been his habit. He preferred to eat alone. Guderian found him greatly changed: ‘His left hand trembled, his back was bent, his gaze was ɹxed, his eyes protruded but lacked their former lustre, his cheeks were ɻecked with red.’ But when Hitler met Milch, he showed no regret for the vast waste of life at Stalingrad. He could think only of raising the stakes once again, throwing away even more lives. ‘We will end the war this year,’ he told him. ‘I have accordingly decided on a gigantic mobilization of all German popular strength.’

In Russia, the ɹerce exultation over the victory was spontaneous as well as orchestrated. The Kremlin bells rang out news of Paulus’s surrender. Rousing martial music was broadcast over the radio and communiqués were published across the front of every newspaper. They lauded the ‘stern lesson in history’ administered to the ‘adventurers of the German General Staʃ’ by the Red Army’s own Hannibals in this modern battle of Cannae. Stalin was portrayed as the wise leader and great architect of victory.

Morale in the Soviet Union genuinely soared. Throughout the battle people everywhere had asked each other for the latest news of the ɹghting on the Volga. When victory came after such a terrible battle, people kept telling each other: ‘You cannot stop an army which has done Stalingrad.’ They joked too in delight at the expense of the defeated enemy. ‘I wonder how it feels to be a ɹeld marshal caught in a cellar?’ was a popular remark. ‘After Stalingrad, not a single soldier had a single doubt about the outcome of the war,’ said an oɽcer wounded there. Stalingrad divisions were distributed to diʃerent armies and fronts to raise morale still further.

Stalin was soon appointed Marshal of the Soviet Union by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, a touch which was marginally more modest than Napoleon crowning himself. The history of the war was suddenly refashioned. The disasters of 1941 were made to appear as if they were all part of a cunning plan devised by Stalin. Stalin’s picture and name had been kept out of the press during the bad periods, but now ‘the great captain of the Soviet people’, ‘the genius organizer of our victories’ was back to the fore. All disasters and all evils were attributed to others, rather as courtiers were blamed in tsarist times. Ilya Ehrenburg, with breathtaking cynicism, remarked that the people ‘needed to believe’. Even prisoners in the Gulag wrote to the Great Father of the People, convinced that he would step in to correct a terrible miscarriage of justice, unthinkable under Communism. No leader had a more eʃective lightning conductor than Beria.

Red Army generals were conspicuously rewarded. The recent suspension of dual command with commissars was crowned with the formal reinstatement of the rank and description of ‘oɽcer’. The euphemism ‘commander’ was dropped. As General Schlömer had noted with amusement, shoulder boards – symbols of privilege which some Bolshevik lynch mobs in 1917 had nailed to the bodies of their tsarist wearers – were reinstated. (Gold braid had been secretly ordered from Great Britain, to the astonishment and disapproval of oɽcials there.) One soldier in a Guards division heard the news about shoulder boards from an old man polishing boots in a railway station: ‘They’re starting these gold shoulder boards once more,’ the man told him in angry disbelief. ‘Just like in the White Army.’ His fellow soldiers too were amazed when he told them the news on returning to the train: ‘Why in the Red Army?’ they asked. Such mutterings were ignored. The new decorations for the Great Patriotic War – the Orders of Suvorov and of Kutuzov were also distributed to senior commanders in the campaign.

The greatest propaganda success, however, extended far beyond Soviet frontiers. The story of the Red Army’s sacriɹce had a powerful eʃect across the world, especially within occupied Europe. Its eʃect on resistance movements everywhere and thus its inɻuence on the politics of post-war Europe were considerable. The triumph of the Red Army boosted the status of the Party member and attracted fellow-travellers in droves. Even conservatives could not avoid praising the heroism of the Red Army. In Britain, King George VI commissioned a Sword of Stalingrad to be forged for presentation to the city. The morale of civilians and soldiers alike was boosted by newsreels lauding the victory, with ɻickering footage of Paulus and the long columns of prisoners of war, snaking across the snow-covered landscape. Everyone knew that the Russians were taking the brunt of the German onslaught, and that the Eastern Front was bleeding the Wehrmacht to death far more surely than any western theatre. The Red Army would push on, as the oɽcer had shouted at the prisoners of war, until Berlin looked like the ruined city of Stalingrad.

OceanofPDF.com 24

The City of the Dead

The silence that fell on 2 February in the ruined city felt eerie for those who had become used to destruction as a natural state. Grossman described mounds of rubble and bomb craters so deep that the low-angled winter sunlight never seemed to reach the bottom, and ‘railway tracks, where tanker wagons lie belly up, like dead horses’.

Some 3,500 civilians were put to work as burial parties. They stacked frozen German corpses like piles of timber at the roadside, and although they had a few carts drawn by camels, most of the removal work was accomplished with improvised sleds and handcarts. The German dead were taken to bunkers, or the huge anti-tank ditch, dug the previous summer, and tipped in. Later, 1,200 German prisoners were put to work on the same task, using carts, with humans instead of horses pulling them. ‘Almost all members of these work parties’, reported a prisoner of war, ‘soon died of typhus.’ Others – ‘dozens each day’ according to an NKVD oɽcer in Beketovka camp – were shot on the way to work by their escorts.

The grisly evidence of the ɹghting did not disappear swiftly. After the Volga thawed in spring, lumps of coagulated blackened skin were found on the river bank. General de Gaulle, when he stopped in Stalingrad on his way north to Moscow in December 1944, was struck to ɹnd that bodies were still being dug up, but this was to continue for several decades. Almost any building work in the city uncovered human remains from the battle.

More astonishing than the number of dead was the capacity for human survival. The Stalingrad Party Committee held meetings in all districts ‘liberated from fascist occupation’, and rapidly organized a census. They found that at least 9,796 civilians had lived through the ɹghting, surviving in the battleɹeld ruins. They included 994 children, of whom only nine were reunited with their parents. The vast majority were sent oʃ to state orphanages or given work clearing the city. The report says nothing of their physical or mental state, witnessed by an American aid worker, who arrived very soon after the ɹghting to distribute clothes. ‘Most of the children’, she wrote, ‘had been living in the ground for four or ɹve winter months. They were swollen with hunger. They cringed in corners, afraid to speak, to even look people in the face.’

The Stalingrad Party Committee had higher priorities. ‘Soviet authorities were immediately reinstalled in all districts of the city’, it reported to Moscow. On 4 February, Red Army commissars held a political rally for the ‘whole city’, both civilian survivors and soldiers. This assembly, with its long speeches in praise of Comrade Stalin and his leadership of the Red Army, was the Party’s version of a service of thanksgiving.

The authorities did not at ɹrst allow civilians who had escaped to the east bank to return to their homes, because of the need to clear unexploded shells. Mine-clearance teams had to prepare a basic pattern of ‘special safe paths’. But many soon managed to slip back over the frozen Volga without permission. Messages appeared chalked on the side of ruined buildings, testifying to the numbers of families broken up by the ɹghting: ‘Mama, we are all right. Look for us in Beketovka. Klava.’ Many people never discovered which of their relatives were alive or dead until after the war was over.

A large contingent of German prisoners, many of whom were too weak to stand, were also forced to attend a political rally in the centre of Stalingrad, and listen to long harangues from three of the leading German Communists: Walter Ulbricht, Erich Weinert and Wilhelm Pieck.

The state of most prisoners at the time of the surrender was so pitiful, that a considerable death rate was predictable in the weeks and months to follow. How far this was exacerbated by ill-treatment, casual brutality, and above all logistic deɹciencies is impossible to calculate. Of the 91,000 taken prisoner at the end of the battle, almost half had died by the time spring arrived. The Red Army itself acknowledged in subsequent reports that orders for the care of prisoners had been ignored, and it is impossible to tell how many Germans were shot out of hand during or soon after their surrender, often as vengeance for the deaths of relatives or comrades.

The death rate in the so-called hospitals was terrifying. The tunnel system in the Tsaritsa gorge, redesignated ‘Prisoner of War Hospital No. 1’, remained the largest and most horriɹc, only because there were no buildings left oʃering any protection against the cold. The walls ran with water, the air was little more than a foul, sickly recycling of human breath, with so little oxygen left that the few primitive oil lamps, fashioned from tins, ɻickered and died constantly, leaving the tunnels dark. Each gallery was not much wider than the casualties lying side by side on the damp beaten earth of the tunnel ɻoor, so it was diɽcult, in the gloom, not to step or trip on feet suʃering from frostbite, provoking a hoarse shriek of pain. Many of these frostbite victims died of gangrene, because the surgeons could not cope. Whether they would have survived amputation in their weakened state and without anaesthetic is another matter.

The condition of many of the 4,000 patients was pitiful in the extreme, and the doctors were helpless as fungus spread on rotten ɻesh. They had almost no bandages left and no medicaments. Ulcers and open sores provided easy entry points for tetanus from the ɹlth around. Sanitary arrangements, which consisted of a single bucket to scores of men suʃering from dysentery, were unspeakable, and at night there were no lamps. Many men were too weak to raise themselves from the ground and there were not enough orderlies to answer the constant cries for help. The orderlies, already weak from undernourishment and soon fever-ridden themselves, had to carry polluted water up from the ravine.

The doctors did not even have a reliable list of patients’ names, let alone proper medical notes. Second-line Russian troops, and also members of ambulance units, had stolen their medical equipment and drugs, including analgesics. The Protestant chaplain of the 297th Division was shot in the back of the neck by a Soviet major when he bent over to help a wounded man.

Russian medical oɽcers were appalled by the conditions. Some were sympathetic. The Russian commandant shared out his cigarettes with German doctors, but other Soviet personnel traded bread for any watches which had survived the earlier rounds of looting. Dibold, the doctor from the 44th Infantry Division, described how when a woman army surgeon, jolly and with the strong red face of peasant ancestors, came in to bargain for watches, a young Austrian from a poor family produced a silver pocket watch. He handed over this heirloom, no doubt given to him on going oʃ to war, and in return he received half a loaf. This he divided among the other men, keeping the smallest portion for himself.

Misery also brought the scum to the surface. Certain individuals exploited the helplessness of former comrades with a previously unimaginable shamelessness. Thieves robbed from corpses and from the weakest patients. If anyone had a watch, wedding ring or other valuable left, it was soon snatched in the dark. But nature had its own form of poetic justice. The robbers of the sick rapidly became typhus victims from infected lice transferred with the booty. One interpreter, infamous for his activities, was found to have a large bag of gold rings hidden on him when he died.

At ɹrst, the Soviet authorities provided no rations at all. NKVD and Red Army ɹles now show that, even though surrender was known to be imminent, virtually no preparation had been made to guard, let alone to feed, the prisoners. The German Communist, Erich Weinart, claimed that heavy snow had hampered the transport of supplies, but this is unconvincing. The real problem was a mixture of brutal indiʃerence and bureaucratic incompetence, above all a lack of coordination between army and NKVD. There was also a deep reluctance to allow German prisoners rations when the Soviet Union was so desperately short of food. Many Red Army soldiers were badly undernourished, to say nothing of civilians, so the idea of giving any food at all to invaders who had plundered their country seemed almost perverse. Rations ɹnally started to arrive after three or four days, by which time many men had eaten virtually nothing in almost two weeks. Even for the sick there was little more than a loaf of bread between ten men, plus some soup made from water with a few millet seeds and salted ɹsh. It would have been unrealistic to expect better treatment, especially when one considers the Wehrmacht’s record on the treatment of its own prisoners, both military and civilian, in the Soviet Union.

The greatest fear of doctors for their patients, however, was not death by starvation but a typhus epidemic. Many had expected an outbreak in the Kessel when the ɹrst cases appeared, but had not dared voice their concerns in case it started a panic. In the tunnel system, they continued to isolate the diʃerent diseases as they appeared, whether diphtheria or typhus. They begged the authorities to provide delousing facilities, but many Red Army soldiers and almost all the civilians in the region were themselves still infested.

It was not surprising that so many died. There seemed to be little reason left to ɹght for life. The prospect of seeing families again was remote. Germany was so far away that it could have been another world, a world which now seemed to have more to do with pure fantasy. Death promised a release from suʃering, and towards the end, drained of pain as well as strength, there was no more than a sense of ɻoating weightless. The ones most likely to survive seemed to be those who fought on, either through religious faith, or an obstinate refusal to die in such squalor, or out of a determination to live for their family’s sake.

A will to live played just as important a part in those marched oʃ to prison camps. What Weinert described as ‘limping and shuʀing ghosts in rags’ followed the back of the man in front. As soon as the exertion of the march warmed their bodies, they could feel the lice become more active. Some civilians grabbed blankets from their backs, spat in their faces and even threw stones. It was best to be close to the front of the column and, safest of all, to stay near one of the escorts. Some soldiers whom they passed, contrary to Red Army orders, took pot shots for fun at the columns of prisoners, just as German soldiers had ɹred at columns of Red Army prisoners in 1941.

The luckier ones were marched straight to one of the designated collection camps in the area, although they varied greatly in distance. Those from the northern pocket, for example, were marched over twelve miles to Dubovka, north of Stalingrad. It took two days. During the night, they were shepherded into the rooɻess remains of buildings – destroyed by the Luftwaʃe, as their guards did not fail to remind them.

Thousands, however, were taken on what can only be described as death marches. The worst, without food or water in temperatures of between twenty-ɹve and thirty degrees below zero, followed a completely zigzag route from the Tsaritsa ravine, via Gumrak and Gorodishche, ɹnally ending up on the ɹfth day at Beketovka. From time to time, they heard shots in the freezing air, as another victim collapsed in the snow, unable to walk any further. Thirst was as great a threat as weakness from hunger. Although surrounded by snow, they suʃered the fate of the Ancient Mariner, knowing the dangers of consuming it.

Shelter was seldom available at night, so the prisoners slept in the snow together. Many woke to ɹnd close comrades dead and frozen stiʃ beside them. In an attempt to prevent this, one of the group was designated to stay awake ready to wake the others after half an hour. Then they would all move as briskly as they could to reactivate the circulation. Others did not even dare to lie down. Hoping to sleep like horses, they stood together in a group with a blanket over their heads to keep in some warmth from their breath.

Morning brought not relief, but dread of the march ahead. ‘The Russians had very simple methods,’ observed a lieutenant who survived. ‘Those who could walk, were marched oʃ. Those who could not, either through wounds or sickness, were shot or left without food to die.’ Having quickly grasped this brutal logic, he was prepared to barter his woollen pullover for milk and bread from a Russian peasant woman at the night stop, because he knew that otherwise he would collapse from weakness the next day.

‘We set out with 1,200 men,’ recounted a soldier from the 305 th Infantry Division, ‘and only a tenth, about 120 men, were left alive by the time we reached Beketovka.’

The gateway to the main camp at Beketovka was another entrance which deserved the superscription: ‘Abandon hope all ye who enter here.’

On their arrival, the guards searched prisoners for valuables once again, then made them stand for ‘registration’. The prisoners soon discovered that standing out in the freezing weather for hours and hours, parading in groups of ɹves for ‘counting parade’, would be a daily penance. Finally, after the NKVD had carried out an initial processing, they were led oʃ to the wooden huts, where they were packed in, forty or ɹfty men to a room, ‘like herrings in a barrel’, recorded a survivor. On 4 February, an NKVD oɽcer complained to Don Front headquarters that the situation was ‘extremely critical’. The camps at Beketovka had received 50,000 prisoners, ‘including also sick and wounded’.

The NKVD camp authorities were overwhelmed. They had no motor transport at all and tried to beg the army for a single truck. Water was eventually brought to the camp in iron barrels on carts towed by camels. A captured Austrian doctor noted his ɹrst impression: ‘Nothing to eat, nothing to drink, ɹlthy snow and urineyellow ice oʃered the only relief for an unbearable thirst… Every morning more corpses.’ After two days, the Russians provided some ‘soup’, which was no more than a sack of bran tipped into warm water. Anger at the conditions led to prisoners scraping handfuls of lice oʃ their own bodies and throwing them at their guards. Such protests provoked summary execution. Right from the start, the Soviet authorities set out to divide the prisoners of war, ɹrst on national lines, then political. Romanian, Italian and Croat prisoners of war were given the privilege of working in the kitchens, where the Romanians in particular set out to gain revenge on their former allies. The Germans had not only got them into this hell, they believed, they had also cut oʃ their supplies in the Kessel to feed their own troops better. Gangs of Romanians attacked individual Germans collecting food on behalf of their hut and seized it. The Germans retaliated, by sending escorts to guard their food carriers.

‘Then came another shock,’ recorded a Luftwaʃe sergeant-major. ‘Our Austrian comrades suddenly ceased to be Germans. They called themselves “Austritsy”, hoping to secure better treatment – as indeed happened.’ Germans felt bitter that ‘all the guilt of the war was heaped on those of us who remained “Germans”,’ particularly since Austrians, with an interesting turn of logic, tended to blame Prussian generals, rather than the Austrian Hitler, for their predicament.

The struggle to stay alive remained paramount. ‘The dead each morning were laid outside the barrack block,’ wrote a panzer oɽcer. These naked, frozen corpses were then stacked by working parties in an ever-extending line down one side of the camp. A doctor estimated that at Beketovka the ‘mountain of bodies’ was ‘about a hundred yards long and six feet high’. At least ɹfty to sixty men died every day, estimated the Luftwaʃe warrant oɽcer. ‘We had no tears left,’ he wrote later. Another prisoner used as an interpreter by the Russians later managed to get a look at the ‘death register’. He noted down that up to 21 October 1943, 45,200 died in Beketovka alone. An NKVD report acknowledges that in all the Stalingrad camps, 55,228 prisoners had died by 15 April, but one does not know how many had been captured between Operation Uranus and the ɹnal surrender.

‘Hunger’, observed Dr Dibold, ‘changed the psyche and character, visibly in behaviour patterns and invisibly in men’s thoughts.’ German as well as Romanian soldiers resorted to cannibalism to stay alive. Thin slices of meat cut from frozen corpses were boiled up. The end product was oʃered round as ‘camel-meat’. Those who ate it were quickly recognizable, because their complexion acquired a hint of red, instead of the grey-green pallor of the majority. Cases were reported from other camps in and around Stalingrad, even in a camp housing prisoners captured during Operation Uranus. One Soviet source claims that ‘only at gunpoint could prisoners be forced to desist from this barbarism’. The authorities ordered more food, but incompetence and corruption in the system blunted any measure.

The accumulated eʃect of exhaustion, cold, sickness and starvation dehumanized prisoners in other ways. With dysentery rife, those who collapsed and fell into the hell-hole of the latrines were left to drown, if still alive. Few had the strength or the will to pull them out. Their terrible fate below was ignored. The need of others suʃering from dysentery to use the latrine was far too urgent.

Curiously, the latrine saved one starving young lieutenant, a count whose family owned several castles and estates. He overheard a soldier say something in the unmistakable dialect of his district, and quickly called out, asking where he was from. The soldier gave the name of a small village nearby. ‘And who are you and where do you come from?’ he asked in return. The oɽcer told him. ‘Oh yes,’ the soldier laughed. ‘I know. I used to see you go past in your red Mercedes sports car, oʃ to shoot hare. Well, here we are together. If you are hungry, perhaps I can help.’ The soldier had been chosen as a medical orderly in the prison hospital, and because so many of the inmates died before they had a chance to eat their bread ration, he managed to accumulate a bag of leftover crusts to share with others after each spell of duty. This utterly unexpected intervention saved the young count’s life.

Survival often ran counter to expectation. The ɹrst to die were generally those who had been large and powerfully built. The small thin man always stood the best chance. Both in the Kessel and later in the prison camps, the equally minute ration scales were almost bound to reverse the normal survival of the ɹttest, because they made no allowance for the size of the individual. It is interesting that in Soviet labour camps, only horses were fed according to their size.

When spring arrived, the Soviet authorities began to reorganize the prisoner-of-war population in the region. Altogether some 235,000 former members of the Sixth Army and the Fourth Panzer Army, including those captured during Manstein’s attempted relief operation in December, as well as Romanians and other allies, had been held in around twenty camps and prison hospitals in the region.

The generals were the ɹrst to leave. Their destination was a camp near Moscow. They departed in what junior oɽcers cynically dubbed the ‘White Train’, because its carriages were so comfortable. Great bitterness was caused by the fact that those who had given orders to ɹght to the end had not just outlived their own rhetoric, but now enjoyed incomparably better conditions than their men. ‘It is the duty of a general to stay with his men,’ remarked one lieutenant, ‘not to go oʃ in a sleeping-car.’ Chances of survival proved brutally dependent on rank. Over 95 per cent of soldiers and NCOs died, 55 per cent of junior oɽcers and just 5 per cent of senior oɽcers. As the foreign journalists had noted, few of the senior oɽcers had shown signs of starvation just after the surrender, so their defences were not dangerously weakened in the same way as their men’s. The privileged treatment which the generals received, however, was a revealing testimony to the Soviet Union’s sense of hierarchy.

Small numbers of oɽcers were sent to camps in the region of Moscow, such as Lunovo, Krasnogorsk and Suzdal. Those selected for ‘anti-fascist education’ were sent to the fortiɹed monastery of Yelabuga, east of Kazan. Conditions of transport were most certainly not up to those provided for the generals. Out of one convoy of 1,800 men in March, 1,200 died. In addition to typhus, jaundice and diphtheria, scurvy, dropsy and tuberculosis had now emerged. And as soon as spring arrived properly, the number of cases of malaria rose rapidly.

The diaspora of soldiers and junior oɽcers was considerable, with 20,000 sent to Bekabad, east of Tashkent, 2,500 to Volsk, north-east of Saratov, 5,000 down the Volga to Astrakhan, 2,000 to Usman, north of Voronezh, and others to Basyanovsky, north of Sverdlovsk, Oranky near Gorky, and also to Karaganda.

When prisoners were registered before departure, many put down ‘agricultural labourer’ as their profession in the hope of being sent to a farm. Hardened smokers collected camel dung and dried it to have something to smoke on the journey. After the experience of Beketovka, they were certain that the worst must be over, and the prospect of movement and change had its own appeal, but they soon discovered their mistake. Each railway wagon, with up to a hundred men forced into each one, had a single hole in the middle of the ɻoor as a latrine. The cold was still terrible, but thirst was again the worst aʀiction, for they were given dried bread and salt ɹsh to eat, but little water. So desperate did they become, that they licked the condensation frozen to metal parts inside the truck. At stops men allowed out often could not resist seizing handfuls of snow and forcing it into their mouths. Many died as a result, usually so silently that their comrades only realized that they had gone much later. Their corpses were then stacked by the sliding door of the wagon, ready for unloading. ‘Skolko kaputt?’ Soviet guards would shout out in their pidgin-German at stops. ‘How many dead?’

Some journeys lasted up to twenty-ɹve days. The transports via Saratov, then across Uzbekistan to Bekabad, were among the worst. In one wagon only eight men remained alive out of 100. When prisoners ɹnally reached the reception camp in sight of the Pamir mountains, they discovered that it had been established for the construction of a nearby hydroelectric dam. Their relief to hear that they were to be deloused, at last, soon turned to dismay. They were clumsily shaved all over, which could ‘only be compared to sheepshearing’, then sprayed with powder. A number died from the primitive chemicals used. There were no huts to live in, only earth bunkers. But the worst surprise was a German corporal who had joined the Soviets as a guard commander. ‘No Russian ever treated me with such brutality,’

wrote the same prisoner. * Fortunately, movement between camps in this parallel Gulag was frequent. From Bekabad, many went to Kokant or, best of all, to Chuama, where there were much better medical facilities, and even a crudely improvised swimming pool. The Italian prisoners there were already well organized, catching sparrows to supplement the soup.

Those left behind in Stalingrad found that the collection camp at Krasnoarmeysk had been turned into a labour camp. The food at least improved with kasha (buckwheat porridge) and ɹsh soup, but the work was often dangerous. When spring arrived, many of them were put to work retrieving Volga river craft sunk by the Luftwaʃe and the German Army. One Russian shipyard manager, shaken by the number of prisoners who died on this work, swore his daughter to secrecy before telling her about it.

The NKVD’s grip on Stalingrad had not slackened. German prisoners working from both banks of the Volga had noticed that the ɹrst building in the city to be repaired was the NKVD headquarters, and almost immediately there were queues of women outside with food parcels for relatives who had been arrested. Former Sixth Army soldiers guessed that they too would be prisoners there for many years. Molotov later conɹrmed their fears, with his declaration that no German prisoners would see their homes until Stalingrad had been rebuilt.

OceanofPDF.com 25

The Sword of Stalingrad

In November 1943, one year after Operation Uranus, a Douglas transport plane ɻew low over Stalingrad. The Soviet diplomats on board were on their way from Moscow to meet the American and the British leaders at Tehran. One of the passengers was Valentin Berezhkov, who had been Dekanozov’s interpreter in Berlin on the eve of Barbarossa.

‘We pressed to the windows in silence,’ he wrote later. ‘First individual houses scattered in the snow came into view, and then a kind of unbelievable chaos began: lumps of walls, boxes of halfruined buildings, piles of rubble, isolated chimneys.’ They could, however, distinguish signs of life. ‘Visible against the snow were the black ɹgures of people and every now and then there was evidence of new buildings.’ Out over the steppe again, they spotted the rusty skeletons of tanks.

At the Tehran conference, Churchill presented the Sword of Stalingrad to ‘the Soviet people’. The blade bore the engraved dedication: ‘To the steelhearted citizens of Stalingrad, a gift from King George VI as a token of the homage of the British people.’ Churchill made the ceremony memorable by his oratory. Stalin, who accepted the sword with both hands, lifted it to his lips to kiss the scabbard. He then passed it to Marshal Voroshilov, who clumsily let the sword slide out of the scabbard. It clattered loudly on the ɻoor.

That evening, Stalin raised his glass after dinner. ‘I propose a salute’, he said, ‘to the swiftest possible justice for all Germany’s war criminals… I drink to our unity in dispatching them as fast as we catch them, all of them, and there must be quite a few of them.’ Some sources say that he proposed the execution of 50,000 Wehrmacht oɽcers to destroy German military power for good. Churchill stood up angrily and declared that the British people would never ‘stand for such mass murder’. Nobody should be shot without a proper trial. He walked out. Stalin, amused at the reaction he had provoked, went after him. Placing both hands on his shoulders, he claimed that he had been joking and cajoled Churchill into returning.

The Tehran conference determined Allied strategy for the rest of the war. Churchill’s plan for an invasion through the Balkans was vetoed for sound military reasons. The Western Allies’ main eʃort had to be devoted to north-west Europe. But this strategic logic left the fate of eastern and central Europe entirely in Stalin’s hands. Churchill, with a strong inkling of the consequences, could do nothing. Red Army sacriɹces and the terrible suʃering of Russian civilians allowed Stalin to manipulate the Western Allies through a sort of blood guilt because their losses had been minimal in comparison. Several historians charting the Soviet Union’s rise to superpower status have rightly pointed to the victory at Stalingrad as the basis for Stalin’s success at Tehran.

Stalin, capitalizing on his new aura of great statesman, and as a deliberate sop to Roosevelt, had announced the abolition of the Comintern on 15 May 1943. It was an easy pawn to pretend to sacriɹce. Georgi Dimitrov stayed in place, running a rump Comintern under a diʃerent name: the International Section of the Central Committee. Meanwhile, the Soviet victory at Stalingrad had been the greatest boost imaginable to Communist propaganda throughout the world. It was an inspiration even to those who had lost their faith after the Stalinist inquisition in the Spanish Civil War or the Nazi-Soviet Pact of 1939. The story roused left-wing sculptors, painters, novelists and poets, such as Pablo Neruda, who in his Nuevo Canto de Amor a Stalingrado wrote a poem of international love to a city whose name had brought hope to the world.

* For the German prisoners captured at Stalingrad, the future was correspondingly bleak. Some, still dreaming of great counter-attacks which would free them, became convinced at night that they could hear the guns of an advancing army. They were the least likely to survive the years ahead in the prisoner-of-war camps, constructed according to NKVD standards with perimeter fences consisting of ten horizontal strands of barbed wire.

Captivity was almost as uncertain a fate as ɹghting. It also had its share of the ironies of war. Dibold, the Austrian doctor from the 44th Infantry Division, was astonished when three new patients reached his prison hospital. This trio, who looked Jewish, wore German uniforms with eagles and swastikas. One of them smiled at his confusion. ‘Doctor, the miracle of the twentieth century: a Jew as one of Adolf Hitler’s soldiers.’ They were from a Hungarian labour battalion. Their Russian captors had clothed them from captured stores.

Although prison camp rations had improved in the summer of 1943, they were still uneven, varying from camp to camp. Rations were often stolen by corrupt quartermasters who exchanged them for vodka, or by guards whose own families received little more than the German prisoners. Most of the ill-treatment came from a lack of imagination, monumental incompetence, and above all, that Russian tolerance of suʃering which Marxist-Leninist doctrine had managed to exploit so successfully. Nothing, however, was predictable. Prisoners testiɹed how guards, on seeing a photograph of their children, would soften. At a prison hospital outside Stalingrad, after inmates had become used to the idea of men being shot or left to die on the march, Russian guards inexplicably spared three prisoners recaptured after a futile attempt to escape.

Even when conditions improved in the spring of 1943, the death rate in most prison hospitals was at least one per cent per day. The problems were still enormous, especially in the Stalingrad region, with pellagra, tuberculosis, dropsy and scurvy added to the other diseases. A Soviet woman doctor told her German counterparts that Stalingrad civilians were suʃering more from scurvy than the German prisoners, but she gave permission for foraging parties to be sent out to collect herbs and other greenstuʃ, from which the German doctors, in their dispensary, made vitamin concentrates. The inventiveness of prisoner-of-war doctors produced brilliant improvisations. One created out of scrap metal a sphygmomanometer for testing blood pressure. Doctors manufactured their own inoculation against typhus, which consisted of injecting an extract of lice guts. Any article of silk was unpicked to provide surgical thread and scalpels were made out of sharpened tin lids.

Prisoners, suddenly transformed into an underclass, had to learn quickly. They pilfered and fashioned numerous ingenious gadgets. They also learned to make the most of their rations, for example, roasting ɹsh bones from the soup on the stove, and then crushing them up. Some made terrible mistakes. At Ilmen, prisoners reduced to eating reeds and water-hemlock died rapidly as a result. And one prisoner who managed to grab a handful of butter in the kitchen died in agony because his stomach was so unused to fats.

The bad diet on top of the weeks of starvation in the Kessel was the main reason for patients in the prison hospitals failing to recover. They lost nearly all their hair, and their neck muscles became too feeble to raise their heads. Those dying shunned the daylight, as if preparing themselves for perpetual darkness.

Death could often be a deliverance, almost like sleep for the exhausted. A number slipped away quite suddenly, just when doctors thought them over the worst. Sick men would share beds for warmth, even though a number woke up to ɹnd themselves next to a corpse. Some had succumbed rapidly. Helmuth Groscurth died of typhus on 7 April 1943 in the oɽcers’ camp of Frolovo where 4,000 inmates died out of 5,000. It was three years before his family received news of his death. Kurt Reuber died on 20 January 1944, in Yelabuga camp only a few weeks after he had drawn another Madonna for Christmas with the same words: ‘Light, Life, Love’.

A few, after having survived the worst, suddenly killed themselves unexpectedly. In a prison hospital, one oɽcer woke to ɹnd a friend in the next bed sitting up motionless. He had managed to kill himself by ‘thrusting a long thin shard of glass from a broken window straight up into the heart’.

Even the comparatively healthy had little hope of surviving. Their rations – such as unground millet which ran right through the stomach – gave them little strength for the heavy work which the NKVD intended to extract from them through Stakhanovite work programmes. Materialism, as one of them put it, meant that ‘man was just another material’ to be used and discarded. Prisoners were used as pack animals. They ɹrst had to build their own camps in almost virgin forest. They were not allowed huts, but underground bunkers, which ɻooded in spring and autumn. Once the camp was established, their life was one of heavy labour, cutting and dragging timber, and sometimes peat-cutting for winter fuel. Those kept in the Stalingrad area, rebuilding the city and recovering sunken ships from the Volga, were later put to work, along with other Gulag prisoners, digging that Stalinist showpiece, the Volga-Don canal.

Soon after its triumph at Stalingrad, the Soviet state made plans to undermine the Nazi regime and replace it with a puppet Communist state. Prisoners of all ranks were to be divided into ‘anti-fascists’ and ‘fascists’.

In the spring and summer of 1943, senior oɽcers were moved from a camp at Krasnogorsk to the monastery at Suzdal, and then to what became their semi-permanent base: Camp 48 at Voikovo, an old inn and health spa, which was dubbed ‘the Castle’, because of its relative luxury. The NKVD moved the implacable Schmidt away from Paulus, because he was seen as a bad inɻuence.

The NKVD department in charge of prisoners of war ɹrst organized an umbrella organization, the National Committee for Free Germany. To run it, Beria’s men used their tame German Communists. Two months later, another group, the League of German Oɽcers, was set up to attract anti-Nazis unwilling to support the National Committee. Major-General Melnikov, the vice-chief of the department, controlled these activities. Although very much part of Beria’s empire, Melnikov also worked closely with the International Section of the Central Committee. Dmitry Manuilsky, Stalin’s former spy on the Comintern with special responsibility for German aʃairs, had been given another watching brief, which may explain his curious visit to Stalingrad during the latter part of the battle, when Chuikov refused him permission to cross to the west bank.

On 19 August 1943, three Stalingrad generals, Seydlitz, Lattmann and Korfes, who had been identiɹed from interrogations as likely collaborators, were taken from Voikovo to a ‘re-education centre’ at Lunovo. Seydlitz appears to have been emotionally overwhelmed by what he believed was a collective change of heart of many oɽcers, all wanting to save Germany from the Hitlerian apocalypse. He saw himself as their natural leader.

Early in September, Melnikov sent Seydlitz, Korfes and Lattmann back to Voikovo to win over the other Stalingrad generals. Their arrival late at night brought the generals out of their rooms in their pyjamas, intrigued to hear what all the excitement was about. But when Seydlitz announced melodramatically that this was the day of the ‘new Tauroggen’, General Strecker turned away angrily. And next day, when Seydlitz and Lattmann urged them to join in calling for a revolt against Hitler’s regime, Strecker, Sixt von Arnim, Rodenburg and Pfeʃer accused them angrily of treason. Seydlitz and his colleagues did, however, win over Generals Edler von Daniels, Drebber and Schlömer.

Seydlitz, in his moral outrage against Hitler and conviction that they had to join the tide of history to save Germany, failed to recognize the dangers. They had left their opposition to the Nazi regime so late that the Allies would never listen to them or give them any say in the fate of their country. Meanwhile, their organizers (he does not even appear to have realized that Melnikov belonged to the NKVD) would simply exploit them for Soviet interests. Soviet documents show that on 17 September 1943 Seydlitz, as president of the League of German Oɽcers, presented a plan to General Melnikov which proposed raising an army corps of 30,000 men from those captured at Stalingrad. ‘According to Seydlitz’s idea,’ Melnikov reported back to Beria, ‘this corps will be the base for the new government after Hitler is overthrown.’

‘Seydlitz’, Melnikov added, ‘considers himself a candidate for the job of chief commander of the armed forces of Free Germany in the future.’ He apparently also promised to prepare a plan for a press and radio propaganda campaign, ‘sending men to the German rear to win over formation commanders to our side and to organize joint action against Hitler’s regime’. Seydlitz would send messages to ‘his personal friends, the commander of the Central Front, von Kluge, and General Thomas who is responsible for Hitler’s headquarters staʃ’.

Seydlitz, accompanied by Generals Lattmann and Korfes, and Colonel Günter van Hooven, presented his plan on 22 September. He expected the Soviet authorities to help them form ‘a small army from prisoners of war which could be used by a new German government to seize power.’ They called for one army staʃ, two corps staʃs, four full divisions, and a supporting aviation force with three bomber squadrons, four ɹghter squadrons and an air reconnaissance group: in all seven generals, 1,650 oɽcers and 42,000 soldiers. Seydlitz appears to have had no idea of the death rate of Stalingrad prisoners after the surrender.

At a subsequent meeting, Seydlitz recommended ‘that all the contingents should be ɻown into Germany, perhaps Berlin’. The NKVD oɽcer present pointed out ‘the technical diɽculties of ɻying such a number of troops into Germany but von Seydlitz replied that it was up to the Russians to sort out the details’. General Korfes, however, did not conceal his exasperation with such a pipe dream. ‘It’s utterly Utopian’, he said, ‘to think that all the units could be carried by air.’ He added: ‘Russian air force commanders would consider such a proposal to be proof that German generals are

fantasists.’*  Seydlitz appears to have been oblivious to the anger and illfeelings which he and his colleagues stirred up. Oɽcers bitterly opposed to the anti-fascists set up a court of honour, sentencing those who collaborated with the Russians to be shunned in perpetuity. As a gesture of deɹance, they began to use the raisedhand salute. This polarization made life very hard for those who wanted nothing to do either with ‘anti-fascists’ or with Hitler loyalists. One lieutenant found himself forced to sleep on the ɻoor for weeks because the rival groups would not allow him a bunk.

In February 1944, Russian aircraft started dropping leaɻets over Germany and front-line troops, signed by Seydlitz and his colleagues. The Gestapo provided an urgent report for Himmler verifying that Seydlitz’s signature was genuine. General Gille of the Waʃen SS, whose troops in the Cherkassy salient were showered with leaɻets from the National Committee, sent copies back to Germany. He also passed back personal letters addressed to him from Generals Seydlitz and Korfes, who had been sent to his part of the front by Shcherbakov. The handwriting was again analysed by the Gestapo and conɹrmed as accurate.

The leaɻets caused panic. Hitler summoned Himmler for a meeting, then sent General Schmundt oʃ with a declaration of loyalty for ɹeld marshals to sign. Even this was not enough to reassure him. On 19 March, Rundstedt, Rommel, Kleist, Busch, Weichs and Manstein were summoned from their duties to the Berghof to read out a message condemning General von SeydlitzKurzbach, ‘the contemptible traitor to our holy cause’, and emphasizing their support for Hitler.

Melnikov’s department, on the other hand, started to have doubts. Recruitment had tailed away, while the propaganda eʃorts had not won over a single major unit, even when the Wehrmacht was suʃering massive defeats. Seydlitz attributed ‘the absence of signiɹcant success’ to ‘the lack of inclination in Germans for revolution, a system of police violence and the complete suppression of opinion, the absence of any capable resistance organization, and the total fear of defeat and its consequences, fanned for so long by the fear of bolshevism’. Despite these failures, he still wanted the Soviet Union to ‘recognize oɽcially’ the National Committee as a government in waiting. But Dmitry Manuilsky, in a typically Stalinist twist, warned that Seydlitz’s memorandum, ‘compiled in a devious way’, was a ‘provocative attempt’ to ‘exacerbate our relations with our allies’. ‘There is no doubt’, he wrote, ‘that the recognition of the National Committee by the Soviet government would provoke in Great Britain and the United States a whole campaign directed to show the position of the Soviet Union as proGerman.’ The Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact clearly cast long shadows in Soviet memories. Manuilsky suspected that Seydlitz was being manipulated by General Rodenburg and the ‘former military intelligence chief, Colonel van Hooven (who was in fact a signals oɽcer).

Stalinist paranoia became worse. In May 1944, Weinert, the President of the National Committee, sent three German oɽcers to the Leningrad Front to carry out propaganda for the Red Army. Two of the oɽcers, Captain Stolz and Lieutenant Willimzig, refused to do what they were ordered. They were brought back to Moscow under close escort to be interrogated by Weinert, Ulbricht, General von Seydlitz and General Lattmann. After four days they are said to have confessed to being ‘members of an illegal fascist organization inside the League of German Oɽcers’. Both men were arrested by the NKVD as double agents working for the Nazis, and taken away for further interrogation. Other German oɽcers, including General Rodenburg, were arrested and ‘confessed’ in their turn. Manuilsky, pretending that his earlier suspicions of a plot were now justiɹed, immediately gave the order that all German oɽcers should be removed from propaganda duties at the front. Clearly Stalin had decided that these unsuccessful eʃorts were simply not worth provoking any trouble with the Western Allies at such a stage of the war, when he needed all their help.

Seydlitz at this time suʃered bouts of severe depression. In an attempt to bolster his morale, NKVD oɽcers organized a birthday cake for him with four red marzipan roses to represent his four daughters. But like all manic-depressives, he also underwent irrational bursts of optimism. The assassination attempt against Hitler on 20 July may have been a failure, but the ensuing Gestapo repression revealed the degree of opposition within the German Army at home. Even Strecker, on hearing of the execution of Field Marshal von Witzleben, was persuaded to sign an appeal against Hitler, but he still despised Seydlitz.

On 8 August 1944, Beria reported triumphantly to Stalin that Paulus had ɹnally signed a declaration to the German people. Paulus’s subsequent appeal to Army Group North to surrender was entirely drafted by the NKVD ‘on Comrade Shcherbakov’s instructions’, and signed on 21 August by Paulus and twenty-nine captured generals.

Paulus’s declarations triggered Hitler’s rage again at having made him a ɹeld marshal. The Führer’s suspicion that he would give in to his Soviet captors appeared to be conɹrmed. Yet clearly, Paulus, after nearly a year and a half of imprisonment, had not made his decision on the spur of the moment. His son Friedrich, a captain, had been killed at Anzio in February 1944, and he had no doubt come to see his duty diʃerently. He wanted to help shorten a lost war and diminish the number of senseless deaths. His other son, Ernst Alexander, also a captain, was subsequently arrested under the Sippenhaft decree. That autumn, their Romanian mother, Elena Constance Paulus, who had always distrusted the Nazis, was told by Gestapo oɽcers that she would be spared if she renounced his name. She is said to have turned her back on them scornfully. She was arrested and held in a camp.

Paulus, cut oʃ from reliable news, requested meetings with a member of the Central Committee ‘who could explain the principles of Soviet policy towards a conquered Germany’. He ‘and the other generals held prisoner bore a heavy responsibility calling for the overthrow of Hitler’s government, and therefore had a moral right to know the position of the Soviet government towards Germany’. He expressed his hopes that Germany might be saved from annihilation during a series of interviews in February 1945, with Lieutenant-General Krivemko, the chief of the NKVD Department for Prisoners of War, and Amyak Zakharovich Kobulov, who ran the Third Directorate of the Ministry of State Security. (Kobulov, the NKVD resident in Berlin just before the launch of Operation Barbarossa, had operated Dekanozov’s torture and execution chamber within the Soviet Embassy.) ‘It should be mentioned’, Krivemko and Kobulov wrote in their report to Beria, ‘that with military operations carried on to German territory, the mood among German general prisoners of war is severely depressed. General of Artillery von Seydlitz was greatly upset by news of the meeting of leaders of the Three Powers [at Yalta]. Seydlitz declared that Germany looked as though it was going to be divided between the USA, Great Britain, the USSR and France. Germany will be left in shreds and the best way out would be to join the USSR “as the seventeenth Soviet Republic”.’

When news of Germany’s unconditional surrender broke in Moscow on 9 May 1945, and a thousand-gun salute boomed out monotonously from the Kremlin, Strecker recorded how he and his colleagues suʃered ‘spiritual depression… listening to the victorious Russian announcements and the songs of drunken Soviet soldiers’.

For Russians, on the other hand, it was the proud yet sad end of a nightmare which had begun almost four years before and cost the Red Army nearly 9 million dead and 18 million wounded. (Only 1.8 million prisoners of war returned alive out of more than 4.5 million taken by the Wehrmacht.) Civilian casualties are much harder to assess, but they are thought to run to nearly 18 million, bringing the total war dead of the Soviet Union to over 26 million, more than ɹve times the total of German war dead.

In 1946, Paulus appeared as a witness at the Nuremberg tribunal. The Soviet Press referred to him as ‘the ghost of Stalingrad’. Afterwards, he was lodged in a villa in Moscow, where he played cards and wrote his version of events. He had aged rapidly and his tic was worse than ever. In 1947 his wife died in Baden-Baden, without having seen her husband again. One can only speculate as to her feelings about the disaster which the battle of Stalingrad signiɹed for Romania, the country of her birth, as well as for her own family.

In November 1947, when the Cold War was rapidly intensifying, the Soviet authorities decided that those deemed guilty of war crimes under the ukase of 13 April 1943, ‘irrespective of their physical condition’, would be sent on forced labour to Vorkhuta at the northern end of the Urals. Former members of the SA, the SS, camp guards, the Secret Field Police and the Feldgendarmerie – in some cases even the Hitler Youth – were transferred to ‘special regime’ camps. The deɹnition of war crimes extended from atrocities against civilians to the looting of chickens and fodder for horses.

As the future structure of the German Democratic Republic (the DDR) began to be assembled in the Soviet-occupied zone of Germany, some senior oɽcers from Stalingrad, including Lattmann, Korfes, Müller and Steidle were allotted roles, several joining the Volkspolizei. General Arno von Lenski’s conversion to Communism led to his being chosen as a member of the Politburo. Colonel Adam, still a fellow traveller, was appointed to a post in the tame Social Unity Party. General von Seydlitz, however, lost out in every direction.

In 1949, another wave of Stalinist purges swept the Soviet Union. German prisoners of war suddenly faced manufactured ‘war crimes’ trials. The Cold War, following the siege of West Berlin, was at its most volatile stage. The ɹghter ace, Erich Hartmann, was charged with destroying aircraft, the property of the Soviet government. General Strecker was taken back to Stalingrad, where a court martial found him guilty of destroying the tractor factory, even though his corps had been nowhere near the place until the very end of the battle, by which time it had long been a ruin. Like the majority accused in this wave, he received a death sentence, automatically commuted to twenty-ɹve years’ imprisonment. Lieutenant Gottfried von Bismarck was condemned to twenty-ɹve years’ hard labour because Russian prisoners of war had worked on his family’s estate in Pomerania. In July 1950, the thoroughly disillusioned and embittered General von Seydlitz was arrested and sentenced to twenty-ɹve years’ imprisonment as a war criminal and ‘revanchist reactionary general’.

Less controversial prisoners found peace of a sort, often thanks to the compassion of Russian women. In some cases, it formed part of an old tradition. Past the prison camp of Kamshkovo, between Moscow and Gorky, ran the Vladimirskaya, the old road along which tsarist exiles were marched to Siberia. Peasants had come out to give them water or even to carry their burdens along the road for them. A similar humanity, untouched by ideology, still existed.

The Austrian doctor, Hans Dibold, was deeply moved by the sympathy of Russians when one of their most respected medical oɽcers, Dr Richard Speiler, from the Weizsäcker hospital in Heidelberg, fell ill suddenly in the early spring of 1946. He had survived typhus, typhoid and diphtheria in the Ilmen camp. His colleagues were convinced at ɹrst that he had malaria. In fact it was blood poisoning picked up during his work. His colleagues were tormented by the idea that their misdiagnosis was leading to his death. They gave him sulphonamides and the last of their penicillin. The two Russian dispensary assistants also handed over the last of their penicillin, which had been allocated for Russian patients, but he died just the same.

The hospital cemetery was approached by a track with low pines and juniper bushes on each side. Behind lay the forest. The Russian doctors paid their respects and the commandant allowed Speiler’s colleagues to organize his funeral in the forest cemetery exactly as they wished. Speiler had returned to the Christian faith in his last few days. The Russian doctors, paying no heed to the possible reactions of a commissar, also attended the funeral service, conducted by a tall, frail pastor. For survivors of the Sixth Army present that day, the service ‘was valid not only for the one dead man there, but for all who lay outside, and all those others far to the south, in Stalingrad and in the steppe between the Don and the Volga, and whom no Christian word had accompanied to their last rest’.

Since 1945, some 3,000 or so of the Stalingrad prisoners had been released, either individually or in batches and allowed home, usually because they were deemed unɹt for labour. In 1955 there were still 9,626 German prisoners of war, or ‘convicted war criminals’ as Khrushchev described them, of whom some 2,000 were survivors of Stalingrad. These prisoners were ɹnally set free after Chancellor Konrad Adenauer’s visit to Moscow in September 1955. They included Generals Strecker, Seydlitz, Schmidt and Rodenburg, and Lieutenant Gottfried von Bismarck, who, almost thirteen years before, had ɻown into the Kessel to rejoin his unit after that dinner with Field Marshal von Manstein. Just to have survived, he wrote, was ‘suɽcient reason to be thankful in the face of fate’.

Seydlitz, when their journey ended in Friedland bei Göttingen, knew that he faced a diɽcult future in the atmosphere of the Cold War. In April 1944, he had been condemned in absentia as a traitor, and all his possessions were conɹscated. This ruling was overturned by a court in 1956, but the new Bundeswehr refused to restore his rank and pension. The fact that he had cooperated with the Communist enemy put him, in the eyes of many, in a diʃerent league from those oɽcers who tried to assassinate Hitler, even though General Achim Oster, one of the few survivors of the July Plot, recognized Seydlitz as belonging to their ranks. He died, like his cavalry ancestor, ‘a very unhappy man’.

As the historical events were raked over in the post-war years, the mutual recriminations over responsibility for the sacriɹce of the Sixth Army became increasingly bitter. Schmidt, who contrary to Hitler’s expectations had always refused to cooperate with his captors, remained ferociously hostile to oɽcers in the Free Germany movement. Colonel Adam, who had accused him of forcing Paulus to ɹght to the end, was treated witheringly in return as a ‘pensioner of the Soviet-occupied zone’. Paulus, in East Germany, tried vainly to defend himself from accusations of having been subservient to Hitler and indecisive. After his release from captivity in the autumn of 1953, he lived in the Soviet zone, where he wrote paper after paper explaining the situation he had faced. A long, painful illness led to his death in Dresden in 1957. His body was brought to the west, and buried next to that of his wife, in Baden-Baden.

His opponent at Stalingrad, General Chuikov, whose 62nd Army had followed the long road to Berlin as the 8th Guards Army, became commander of the occupation forces, a Marshal of the Soviet Union and deputy minister of defence under Khrushchev, who had appointed him on that September night of crisis by the Volga. The thousands of Soviet soldiers executed at Stalingrad on his orders never received a marked grave. As statistics, they were lost among the other battle casualties, which has a certain unintended justice.

OceanofPDF.com 1. (Previous page) Autumn 1941. Soviet prisoners of war being herded to the rear. 2. July 1942. German infantry marching towards Stalingrad.

3. A village destroyed in the advance.

4. German tanks on the Don steppe. 5. August 1942. German artillery outside Stalingrad.

6. Dr Alois Beck, chaplain of the 297th Infantry Division, writing letters for the wounded. 7. Paulus, Hitler, Keitel, Haider and Brauchitsch at the Wolfsschanze, near Rastenburg.

8. September 1942. Tanks of the 24th Panzer Division advancing into the outskirts of Stalingrad. 9. September 1942. Red Army tank troops listening to a speech from Khrushchev before going into battle.

10. The view which greeted Russian reinforcements about to cross the Volga into battle. 11. German oɽcer and soldiers attacking factory buildings in northern Stalingrad.

12. Russian infantry defending. 13. October 1942. Round-up of Stalingrad civilians.

14. 62nd Army HQ. Krylov, Chuikov, Gurov and Rodimtsev. 15. (Overleaf) Red Army assault squad in the ‘Stalingrad Academy of street-ɹghting’. 16. (Previous page) One of Chuikov’s divisional commanders during the battle, with a young woman signaller. 17. October 1942. German infantry occupying a destroyed workshop in the factory district.

18. ‘Noble Sniper’ Zaitsev (left) from the Siberian 284th Riɻe Division explains the doctrine of ‘sniperism’. 19 and 20. November 1942. Operation Uranus: the encirclement of the Sixth Army. 21. Junkers 52 transport taking oʃ.

22. December 1942. German artillery from Hoth’s Fourth Panzer Army after the failure of Operation Winter Storm to relieve the Sixth Army. 23. Trapped Sixth Army soldiers retrieve parachute canisters.

24. 10 January 1943. General Rokossovsky awaits the opening barrage for Operation Ring to crush the Kessel. 25. 11 January 1943. German infantry retreating through a blizzard.

26. 28 January 1943. General Edler von Daniels marches into captivity past the body of one of his soldiers. 27. 30 January 1943. Goering on the tenth anniversary of Hitler’s assumption of power, having just broadcast ‘the funeral oration’ of the Sixth Army. 28. 31 January 1943. Field Marshal Paulus and General Schmidt at 64th Army HQ after surrendering.

29. A German soldier booted and prodded out of a bunker. 30. Remnants of the Sixth Army marched oʃ to captivity.

31. German and Romanian prisoners.

OceanofPDF.com APPENDIX A

German and Soviet Orders of Battle, 19 November 1942

WEHRMACHT

SIXTH

ARMY

Ia Operations:

Ib Quartermaster:

General of Panzer Troops Paulus Major-General Schmidt

Colonel Elchlepp† Major von Kunowski

Ic Intelligence: Lieutenant-Colonel Niemeyer† IIa Adjutant: Colonel W. Adam Chief of Major-General Vassoll Artillery:

Chief of Colonel Arnold* (replaced by Colonel Signals: van Hooven‡) Chief of Colonel H. Selle* (replaced by Engineers: Colonel Stiotta*) Chief of General Renoldi Medical Corps:

OKH liaison Lieutenant-Colonel von Zitzewitz* oɽcer:

ARMY TROOPS: MAJOR UNITS

Mortar regiments: 51st, 53rd Nebelwerfer regiments: 2nd, 30th Artillery regiments: 4th, 46th, 64th, 70th Artillery battalions: 54th, 616th, 627th, 849th Heavy-artillery battalions: 49th, 101st, 733rd Pioneer battalions: 6th, 41st

IV CORPS

General of ioneers Jaenecke* Colonel Crome Major-General Leyser

29th Motorized Infantry Division 297th Infantry Division 371st Infantry Division

VIII CORPS

76th Infantry Division 113th Infantry Division

XI CORPS

44th Infantry Division 376th Infantry Division 384th Infantry Division

XIV PANZER CORPS 3rd Motorized Infantry division 60th Motorized Infantry Division 16th Panzer Division

LI CORPS

71st Infantry Division 79th Infantry Division

Lieutenant-General Pfeʃer

Lieutenant-General Stempel†

General of Artillery Heitz Colonel Schildknecht Lieutenant-General Rodenburg

Lieutenant-General Sixt von Arnim

Lieutenant-General Strecker Colonel Groscurth‡ Lieutenant-General Deboi

Lieutenant-General Freiherr Edler von Daniels Lieutenant-General Freiherr von Gablenz*

General of Panzer Troops Hube* Colonel Thunert* Lieutenant-General Schlömer

Major-General Kohlermann*

Lieutenant-General Angern†

General of Artillery von SeydlitzKurzbach Colonel Clausius Lieutenant-General von Hartmann† Lieutenant-General Graf von Schwerin* 94th Infantry Division

100th Jäger Division

295th Infantry Division

305th Infantry Division

389th Infantry Division

14th Panzer Division

24th Panzer Division

Lieutenant-General Pfeiʃer*

Lieutenant-General Sanne

Major-General Doctor Korfes

Major-General Steinmetz*

Major-General Magnus

Major-General Lattmann

Lieutenant-General von Lenski

LUFTWAFFE GROUND TROOPS

9th Flak Division

Major-General Pickert*

luftwaʃe air support

4th Air Fleet

VIII AIR CORPS

Colonel-General Freiherr von Richthofen

General Fiebig

* ɻown out of the Kessel before the ɹnal surrender † died before or just after the ɹnal surrender ‡died in captivity

RED ARMY ON THE ‘STALINGRAD AXIS’

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE STAVKA:

Army General G. K. Zhukov Colonel-General of Artillery Ν. N. Voronov Colonel-General A. M. Vasilevsky

Stalingrad Front

62ND ARMY

Colonel-General A. I. Yeremenko N. S. Khrushchev

General V. I. Chuikov

Riɻe Divisions: 13th Guards (A. I. Rodimtsev), 37th Guards (V. G. Zholudev), 39th Guards (S. S. Guriev), 45th, 95th (V. A. Gorishny), 112th, 138th (I. I. Lyudnikov), 193th (F. N. Smekhotvorov), 196th, 244th, 284th (N. F. Batyuk), 308th (L. N. Gurtiev); 10th NKVD Riɻe Division (Rogatin) Marine Infantry Brigade: 92nd Special Brigades: 42nd, 115th, 124th, 149th, 160th Tank Brigades: 84th, 137th, 189th

64TH ARMY General M. S. Shumilov Riɻe Divisions: 36th Guards, 29th, 38th, 157th, 204th Marine Infantry Brigade: 154th Special Brigades: 66th, 93rd, 96th, 97th Tank Brigades: 13th, 56th

57TH ARMY General F. I. Tolbukhin Riɻe Divisions: 169th, 422nd Special Brigade: 143nd Tank Brigades: 90th, 235th *13th Mechanized Corps (T. I. Tanashchishin)

51ST ARMY General Ν. I. Trufanov Riɻe Divisions: 15th Guards, 91st, 126th, 302nd Special Brigade: 38th Tank Brigade: 254th *4th Mechanized Corps (V. T. Volsky) *4th Cavalry Corps (Shapkin)

28TH ARMY Riɻe Divisions: 34th Guards, 248th Special Brigades: 52, 152, 159 Tank Brigade: 6th Guards Stalingrad Front Reserve: 330th Riɻe Division; 85th Tank Brigade 8ΤΗ AIR ARMY Don Front

General T. T. Khryukin

Colonel-General Κ. K. Rokossovsky

66TH ARMY Major-General A. S. Zhadov Riɻe Divisions: 64th, 99th, 116th, 226th, 299th, 343nd Tank Brigade: 58th

24TH ARMY General I. V. Galanin Riɻe Divisions: 49th, 84th, 120th, 173rd, 233rd, 260th, 273rd Tank Brigade: 10th 16th Tank Corps

65TH army Lieutenant-General P. I. Batov Riɻe Divisions: 4th Guards, 27th Guards, 40th Guards, 23rd, 24th, 252nd, 258th, 304th, 321st Tank Brigade: 121st

16th AIR ARMY South-West Front

Major-General S. I. Rudenko

General N. F. Vatutin

21ST ARMY General I. M. Chistyakov Riɻe Divisions: 63rd, 76th, 96th, 277th, 293rd, 333nd Tank Regiments: 1st, 2nd, 4th Guards *4th Tank Corps (A. G. Kravchenko) *3rd Guards Cavalry Corps (P. A. Pliev)

5TH TANK ARMY Riɻe Divisions: 14th Guards, 47th Guards, 50th Guards, 119th, 159th, 346th *Ist Tank Corps (V. V. Butkov)

General P. L. Romanenko *26th Tank Corps (A. G. Rodin)

*8th Cavalry Corps

1ST GUARDS ARMY

General D. D. Lelyushenko

Riɻe Divisions: 1st, 153rd, 197th, 203rd, 266th, 278th

Front Reserve: 1st Guards Mechanized Corps

2nd AIR ARMY

17TH AIR ARMY

Major-General S. A. Krasovsky

* First-wave breakthrough formations for Operation Uranus

OceanofPDF.com APPENDIX B The Statistical Debate: Sixth Army Strength in the Kessel

The variety of ɹgures cited for the strength of the encircled Sixth Army requires at least an attempt at clariɹcation. Estimates of the strength of the Sixth Army within the Kessel on 19 November 1942 range widely, mainly it seems because there were so many Russians incorporated in the ranks of the Sixth Army that they had been included on the German ration strength and not cited separately. Some of the ɹgures of Manfred Kehrig, the author of Stalingrad: Analyse und Dokumentation einer Schlacht, the magisterial volume published in 1974 under the auspices of the Militärgeschichtlichen Forschung-samt, have recently been challenged by Rüdiger Overmans. Overmans, working mainly from Wehrmacht retrospective estimates (basically an attempt later to calculate from personnel records who had been trapped inside the Kessel), puts the ɹgure of surrounded Germans as low as 195,000, the Hiwis at 50,000 and the Romanians at 5,000, a total of approximately 250,000. Kehrig had estimated 232,000 Germans, 52,000 Hiwis and 10,000 Romanians, a total of approximately 294,000. Another more recent study estimates a total on 18 December of 268,900, of which 13,000 were Romanians and Italians, and 19,300 Hiwis.

This latest breakdown, allowing for the diʃerence in dates and consequent casualty ɹgures, tallies fairly closely with the total compiled on 6 December by the Sixth Army’s Oberquartiermeister. This ‘Sixth Army ration strength in the Kessel’ gave a total of 275,000 men, including 20,300 Hiwis and 11,000 Romanians. (Romanian army sources assert that they had 12,600 men in the Kessel. There were also several hundred Italians.) If one adds to these ɹgures the 15,000 men lost ‘only inside the Kessel’ between 21 November and 6 December, that would mean that almost 290,000 men had been surrounded on 22 November.

All writers are agreed that around 25,000 wounded and specialists were ɻown out, but there is little certainty over the numbers killed or taken prisoner. The truth will never be known in the chaos after the Soviet oʃensive of 10 January 1943 to crush the Kessel. All that we can be fairly sure of is that just under 52,000 members of the Sixth Army had died between 22 November and 7 January, but it is not stated how many of these were Hiwis. The Soviet ɹgure of prisoners taken between 19 November and 31 January – 111,465 as well as 8,928 in hospitals – does not specify how many were German nor, more important, how many belonged to the encircled troops, as opposed to those captured during Operations Winter Storm and Little Saturn.

The Soviet onslaught of Operation Ring on 10 January 1943, added to the eʃects of disease, cold, starvation, exhaustion and summary execution, suggests that losses soared – they may well have doubled to around 100,000, including Hiwis. Both Kehrig and Overmans estimate German losses from 22 November until the surrender at close to 60,000. They naturally make no attempt to estimate the number of Hiwis who died during the ɹghting. One can only assume that very few got away with their lives afterwards.

OceanofPDF.com References

ARCHIVAL SOURCES

Arkhiv Muzeya Panorami Stalingradskoy Bitvi (Archive of the Panoramic Museum of the Battle of Stalingrad), Volgograd Arkhiv Prezidiuma Rossiyskoy Federatsii (Archive of the Presidium of the Russian Federation), Moscow Bundesarchiv-Militärarchiv, Freiburg im Breisgau Bibliothek für Zeitgeschichte – Sammlung Sterz, Stuttgart Gosudarstvennyy Arkhiv Rossiyskoy Federatsii (State Archive of the Russian Federation), Moscow MGFA-P Militärgeschichtliches Forschungsamt library, Potsdam ÖStA-AdR Österreichisches Staatsarchiv – Archiv der Republik, Vienna ÖStA-KA Österreichisches Staatsarchiv – Kriegsarchiv, Vienna PRO Public Record Oɽce, Kew (UK) RGALI Rossiyskiy Gosudarstvennyy Arkhiv Literaturi i Iskusstva (Russian State Archive of Literature and the Arts), Moscow RGVA Rossiyskiy Gosudarstvennyy Voennyy Arkhiv (Russian State Military Archive), Moscow RTsKhIDNI Rossiyskiy Tsentr Khraneniya i Izucheniya Dokumentov Noveyshey Istorii (Russian Centre for the Conservation and Study of Documents of Contemporary History), Moscow TsAMO Tsentralnyy Arkhiv Ministerstva Oborony (Central Archive of the Ministry of Defence), Podolsk ΤsKhIDΚ Tsentr Khraneniya i Izucheniya Dokumentalnikh Kollektsiy (Centre for the Conservation and Study of Historic Document Collections), Moscow TsMVS Tsentralnyy Muzey Vooruzhyonnykh Sil (Central Museum of the Armed Forces), Moscow VOTsDNI Volgograd Oblast, Tsentr Dokumentov Noveyshey Istorii (Volgograd Regional Centre for Documents of Contemporary History) (NB. German documents cited from Russian archives are, unless otherwise stated, Russian translations of captured papers.)

AMPSB

APRF

BA-MA BZG-S GARF INTERVIEWS AND UNPUBLISHED ACCOUNTS

Yelena Filippovna Albert (Stalingrad anti-aircraft defences); Winrich Behr (Hauptmann, HQ Sixth Army and Sonderstab Milch); Lev Aleksandrovich Bezyminsky (Senior Lieutenant, Red Army Intelligence, Don Front HQ); Gottfried von Bismarck (Leutnant, 76th Infantry Division); C. M. Bogomolov (Lieutenant, NKVD, Don Front HQ); Alexander Fürst zu Dohna-Schlobitten (Rittmeister, HQXIV Panzer Corps); Nikolay Dmitrevich Dyat-lenko (Major, NKVD, Don Front HQ); Josef Farber (Soldat, 305th Infantry Division); Generalleutnant a.D. Bernd Freiherr von Freytag-Loringhoven (Hauptmann, 16th Panzer Division and Sonderstab Milch); Zinaida Georgevna Gavrielova (Lieutenant, Medical Services, 62nd Army); Prof. Dr Hans Girgensohn (pathologist, Sixth Army); Aleksandr Vladimirovich Glichov (Lieutenant, 24th Army, then 65th Army); Professor Nikolay Viktorovich Goncharov (Stalingrad civilian); Nina Grigorevna Grebennikova (Stalingrad civilian); Dr Yevgeny Aleksandrovich Grigorev (Stalingrad civilian); Klemens Graf von Kageneck (Hauptmann, 3rd Panzer Division); Viktor Ivanovich Kidyarov (Sergeant, 62nd Army); Lazar Ilich Lazarev (Lieutenant, Marine Infantry); Henry Metelmann (Soldat, 22nd Panzer Division); Valentina Ivanovna Nefyodova (Stalingrad civilian); Oberstleutnant a.D. Gert Pfeiʃer (Hauptmann, 60th Motorized Infantry Division); Hans Schmieder (Hauptwachtmeister, 9th Flak Division, Luftwaʃe); Aleksandr Sergeevich Smirnov (Sergeant, 64th Army); Klavdia Vasilevna Sterman (Private, Red Army Aviation); Aleksandr Vasilevich Tsygankov (Lieutenant, 62nd Army); Boris Nikolaevich Ulko (Corporal, 1st Guards Army); Heinz Wischnewski (Leutnant, 22nd Infantry Division)

Three other veterans wanted their contributions to remain anonymous.

OceanofPDF.com Source Notes

PREFACE

. xiv 13,500 executions, Institute of Military History, 21 Jan. 1993, quoted in Erickson, ‘Red Army battleɹeld p. xiv p. xiv performance’, p. 244 . xiv ‘former Russians’, Dobronin to Shcherbakov, 8 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 81

CHAPTER 1

. 3 ‘an important clariɹcation’, Berezhkov, In diplomatischer Mission bei Hitler,p. 63 . 3 ‘thirty-nine aircraft…’, Maslennikov, RGVA, 38652/1/58.

. 4 ‘is not here…’, Berezhkov, op. cit., p. 64 . 5 ‘Disinformation has…’, quoted in Andrew and Gordievsky, p. 212 . 6 ‘In the course…’, quoted in Erickson, The Road to Stalingrad,p.

110 . 6 ‘Reichsminister von Ribbentrop…’, Berezhkov, op. cit., p. 65 . 7 ‘barely ɹve feet tall…’, Andrew and Gordievsky, p. 195 . 7 ‘like a caged…’, ‘statesmanlike…’, ‘The Führer…’, Schmidt, pp.

212, 234 . 7 ‘His face was scarlet…’, Berezhkov, op. cit., p. 67 . 8 ‘The Soviet Government’s…’, Schmidt, pp. 234–5 . 8 ‘The Führer…’, Berezhkov, op. cit., p. 67 . 8 ‘You’ll regret…’, Berezhkov, op. cit., p. 68 . 9 ‘Even if you retreat…’, Volkogonov, p. 413 . 10 ‘It was as if…’, Gavrielova, conversation, 22 Nov. 1995 . 10 ‘fought in four wars’, Goncharov, conversation, 23 Nov. 1995 . 10 ‘We thought…’, Nefyodova, conversation, 22 Nov. 1995 . 11 ‘Propaganda fell…’, Grigorev, conversation, 22 Nov. 1995

CHAPTER 2

. 12 ‘Nothing is impossible…!’ Reichstag speech of 4 May 1941, Völkischer Beobachter, 5 May 1941 . 12 ‘to establish a defence…’, Führer Directive No. 21, 18 Dec. 1940 . 13 ‘The war with Russia…’, Gefreiter, 24th Pz. Div., interrogation,

12 Aug. 1942, TsAMO 48/453/13, p. 32 . 13 305th Inf. Div. motor transport, BA-MA, RH19 VI/1, p. 129 . 14 ‘Our optimism…’, Freytag-Loringhoven, conversation, 23 Oct.

1995 . 14 ‘the ɹnal encounter…’, IMT ND-447-PS . 14 ‘that the downfall of 1918…’, BA-MA, RW4/577 . 14 ‘That would be…’, Stahlberg, p. 159 . 15 ‘battle between…’, quoted in Messerschmidt, p. 214 . 16 ‘Many tens of millions…’, IMT ND 221-L . 16 ‘It makes one’s hair…’, Hassell, 8 Apr. 1941, p. 173 . 16 ‘The annihilation of those same Jews…’, quoted in Jürgen

Förster, ‘Motivation and indoctrination in the Wehrmacht, 1933–

1945’, in Addison and Calder, p. 270 . 17 ‘The jewish-bolshevik…’, 11th Army HQ 20 Nov. 1941, quoted

in Klee and Dressen, pp. 41–44 . 17 ‘Thegenerals…’, paulus,2iJuly 1951,’DasVerhalten der

Generalität unter Hitler’, BA-MA, N372/9, p. 1 . 17 ‘For us…’, Edgar Klaus, p. 36, and Beiträge zur Geschichte der 60.

Infanterie Division (mot.), TS, MGFA-P, 1979, p. 3 . 17 ‘Instead of…’, Kroll, conversation, 6 May 1996 . 18 ‘Within the regiment…’, Kageneck, conversation, 24 Oct. 1995 . 18 ‘of the three…’, Dr Alois Beck, ÖStA-AdR 522 . 18 ‘You could not…’, anonymous conversation, 16 May 1996 . 18 ‘the Wehrmacht should not…’, Theo Schulte, ‘The German

soldier in occupied Russia’, in Addison and Calder, p. 279 . 18 ‘shocked by…’, Dohna-Schlobitten, pp. 213–14, and

conversation, 16 Oct. 1995 . 19 ‘handed over…’, RGVA, 38652/1/8 . 19 ‘The bombs were falling…’, Col. I. T. Starinov, ‘The frontier

aɻame’, in Bialer, p. 225 . 20 ‘Of course I’ll be there…’, Schmidt, p. 233 . 20 ‘approximately 160…’, quoted in Domarus, vol. ii, p. 1731 . 20 ‘European Crusade…’, Völkischer Beobachter, 28 June 1941

CHAPTER 3

. 21 ‘I know! It has already…’, Starinov, op. cit., in Bialer, p. 222 . 22 ‘impetuous dash…’, Erich von Manstein, Lost Victories,p. 187 . 22 ‘Our pilots feel…’, 4 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 48 .23 ‘The Germans are coming…’, Erickson, The Road to Stalingrad,p.

121 . 23 ‘the study of the…’, Erickson, ‘The development of Soviet

military doctrine’, p. 7 . 24 ‘political demands…’, captured document, APRF 3/58/451 . 25 ‘I was with the troops…’, Starinov, op. cit., in Bialer, p. 237 . 25 ‘a number of conclusions’, APRF, 45/1/478 . 26 ‘I am dying…’, TsMVS . 26 ‘nearly always stubborn…’, APRF, 3/58/451 . 27 ‘shocking and in comprehensible’, Gavrielova, conversation, 22

Nov. 1995 . 27 ‘The hatred Fascism…’, Grossman, Life and Fate,p. 34 . 27 ‘The Motherland Calls!’, TsMVS . 28 ‘Our aim is to defend…’, quoted in N. D. Dyatlenko MS.

. 28 ‘Tomorrow, or…’, Ehrenburg collection, RGALI 1204/2/3453 . 29 ‘the greatest battle…’, Sommerfeldt, pp. 95–6 . 30 ‘Look closely…’, Malaparte, p. 61

CHAPTER 4

. 31 ‘The vastness…’, 12 August 1941, quoted in Messenger, p. 150 . 32 ‘up to forty miles…’, Gottfried von Bismarck MS.

. 32 ‘the knights of modern warfare’, Podewils, p. 32 . 35 ‘What a great…’, letter, 11 Oct. 1941, quoted in Paulus, p. 144 . 35 ‘Strong-point after…’, letter, Lt-Gen. Himer, 2 Oct. 1941, quoted

in Paulus, p. 143 . 37 ‘rubbish’, quoted in Volkogonov, p. 422 . 38 ‘with his impassive…’, Werth, The Year of Stalingrad,p. 104 . 38 ‘Was the military parade…’, conversation, Ulko, 22 Nov. 1995 . 39 ‘If they want a war of extermination…’, Werth, Russia at War,p.

246 . 39 ‘There can be…’, Erickson, The Road to Stalingrad,p. 258 . 40 ‘Many of the men…’, Gen. d. PZ. Tr. Rudolf Schmidt, XXXIX

Panzer Corps, 13 Nov. 1941, quoted in Paulus, p. 145 . 40 ‘This is no longer…’, quoted in Bartov, Hitler’s Army,p. 41 .44 ‘a small army…’, Melnikov to Beria, 25 Sept. 1943, TsKhIDK,

451P/2/6 . 44 ‘The German people…’, Hitler, quoted in Seydlitz, p. 114 . 44 ‘You could see…’, Pabst, p. 54 . 44 ‘photographing of executions…’, German reference: W

283/11.41c, 28 Nov. 1941, RTsKhIDNI 17/125/96 . 45 ‘destroy and burn to ashes’, quoted in Volkogonov, p. 456 .45 ‘Suicide in…’, order entitled ‘Suicide and Attempted Suicide’ of

17 Jan. 1942, TsAMO 48/453/21, p. 29 . 45 ‘Christmas will not take place…’, TsAMO 206/294/48, p. 468 . 46 ‘You are under…’, TsAMO 206/294/48, p. 346 .46 ‘Notes for Those…’, TsAMO 206/294/48, pp. 471–4 .47 ‘We want to return…’, Reichenau to XXIX Army Corps, 25 Dec.

1941, 01348/41, RTsKhIDNI 17/125/96 . 47 ‘Front Letter No. 3’, TsAMO 206/294/12, pp. 17–19

CHAPTER 5

. 52 ‘roughneck…’, quoted in Messenger, p. 61 . 53 ‘more like a scientist…’, Kageneck, conversation, 24 Oct. 1995 . 54 ‘Even his…’, letter, 11 Feb. 1942, quoted in Paulus, p. 164 . 54 ‘punitive measures’, VOTsDNI 113/14/306, quoted in Epifanov,

p. 135 . 55 SS-Obersturmführer August Häfner, quoted in Klee and Dressen

(eds.), p. 111 . 55 ‘In various places…’, reproduced in Heer (ed.), p. 75 . 55 ‘dishonourable for oɽcers…’, Paget, p. 173 . 56 ‘We cannot…’, quoted in Groscurth, p. 91 . 56 ‘You should bring with you…’, quoted in Heer, p. 78 . 56 more than 30,000, R. W. M. Kempner, SS im Kreuzverhör,

Munich, 1964, p. 29 . 56 Reichenau’s order, quoted in Klee and Dressen (eds.), p. 39 . 57 village of Komsomolsk, TsAMO 206/294/48 . 57 ‘Interrogations should end…’, TsAMO 48/453/21, p. 32 . 57 ‘The Landsers go…’, 5 July 1942, TsAMO 206/294/48, p. 485 . 58 ‘Führer’s Birthday’ and other examples all in BA-MA, N395/10 . 58 ‘dead men lying…’, Kageneck, p. 30 . 59 ‘We were afraid…’, Kageneck, pp. 32–3 . 59 ‘Most of them…’, Malaparte, p. 121 . 59 600 Soviet prisoners, Goldhagen, p. 157 . 59 ‘should be left to starve’, BA-ΜA, N159/4, quoted in Messerschmidt, pp. 221–2 . 59 ‘of cold, of starvation…’, Erickson, The Road to Stalingrad,p. 328 . 59 Maximov, NKVD report, 4 Mar. 1943, TsAMO 226/335/7, p.

364 . 60 ‘Their information on…’, 29 Mar. 1942, RTsKhIDNI 17/125/96 . 60 ‘work only if…’, 16 Mar. 1942, RTsKhIDNI 17/125/96 . 60 ‘My ambulance had…’, Dr Hans Heinz Schrömbgens, quoted in

Schneider-Janessen, p. 136 . 61 Feodosia, BA-MA, RW2/V. 151, 152, quoted in de Zayas, p. 181 . 62 ‘Morale was…’, Freytag-Loringhoven, conversation, 23 Oct.

1995 . 62 ‘Just be happy…’, Bruno Gebele, in Beck, p. 102 . 63 ‘qualitative superiority…’, Förster, ‘Evolution and development

of erman doctrine 1914–1945’, p. 7 . 63 ‘My great concern…’, Bock diary, 8 May 1942, quoted in Paulus,

p. 176 . 63 ‘that it was a farewell…’, Seydlitz, p. 147 . 63 ‘The buildings…’, Seydlitz, p. 148 . 65 ‘shells bounced…’, Kageneck, conversation, 24 Oct. 1995 . 66 ‘The ɹghting methods…’, Uʃz. Hans Urban, 389th I.D., BA-MA,

RW4/V 264, p. 89 . 67 ‘the German searchlights…’, MS. by unknown soldier in

Ehrenburg papers, RGALI 1204/2/3453 . 67 ‘the success…’, 20 May 1942, quoted in Paulus, p. 166 . 67 ‘How refreshing it is…’, 12 July 1942, quoted in Paulus, p. 168

CHAPTER 6

. 69 ‘If we don’t take…’, Paulus, p. 157 . 71 ‘the fateful place’, Podewils, p. 29 . 73 ‘The Russian tanks…’, Podewils, pp. 47–8 . 73 ‘shot them…’, TsAMO 230/586/1, p. 78 . 74 ‘During the…’, Bock diary, 3 July 1942, Paulus, p. 185 .75 ‘As far as the eye…’, Podewils, p. 47 . 75 ‘It was almost…’, Kageneck, conversation, 24 Oct. 1995 . 76 ‘an ocean that…’, Strecker, 19 July 1942, Haller, p. 44 . 76 ‘Black ɹgures…’, Podewils, p. 44 . 77 ‘A really small boy…’, 5 July 1942, Bähr and Bähr, p. 137 . 77 ‘Germany, I have not…’, Bähr and Bähr, p. 139 .77 ‘Our lads have…’, Cpl István Balogh, diary entry, 24 July 1942,

RTsKhIDNI 17/125/97 . 78 ‘We were starved…’, TsAMO 206/294/47, p. 147 . 80 Rattenhuber’s interrogation by SMERSH on 28 Nov. 1945,

Voennye Arkhivi Rossii, No. 1, 1993, p. 357 . 81 ‘The constant…’, Haider, 23 July 1942, p. 489 .81 ‘a sun-ray cure’, quoted in Stahlberg, p. 308 . 81 ‘absolute League of Nations army’, quoted in Messenger, p. 149 . 82 ‘amid silent people…’, RTsKhIDNI 17/125/97 . 82 ‘enough to buy…’, interrogation 26 Sept. 1942, TsAMO

206/294/47, p. 561 . 82 ‘A man went to…’, RTsKhIDNI 17/125/97 . 83 98,000 casualties, Mark Axworthy, ‘The Romanian soldier at the

siege of Odessa’, in Addison and Calder, p. 227 . 83 ‘The habit of looting…’, RTsKhIDNI 17/125/97

CHAPTER 7

. 84 ‘They’ve forgotten…’, TsAMO 3/11 556/9, Volkogonov, p. 459 . 84 ‘anyone who removes…’, Order 270 of 16 Aug. 1941, TsAMO 298/2526/5a, quoted in Volkogonov, p. 427 . 85 ‘Panic-mongers…’, 16 Aug. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/28, p. 8 . 85 ‘to combat cowardice’, Zhukov to Stalin, quoted in Volkogonov, p. 469 . 85 ‘traitor to the…’, RTsKhIDNI 17/43/1774 . 85 422,700 Red Army men, Erickson, ‘Red Army battleɹeld

performance’, in Addison and Calder, p. 236 . 85 ‘atone with…’, TsAMO 48/486/28, p. 15 .85 ‘already wounded…’, Dobronin to Shcherbakov, 29 Oct. 1942,

TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 315 . 86 ‘pale because they…’, Nikolay Filin, ‘Kak i pochemu ya byl

agentom SMERSh’, Vechernyaya Moskva, 25 Nov. 1995 . 86 ‘It is very diɽcult…’, Ehrenburg papers, RGALI 1284/2/3466 . 86 ‘of the treatment…’, order from Second Panzer Army, 9 Feb.

1942, RTsKhIDNI 17/125/96 . 87 ‘Most of the soldiers…’, 10 Aug. 1942, TsAMO 48/453/13, p. 10 . 87 ‘a sin against…’, TsAMO 48/453/13, pp. 4–7 . 87 ‘as hot…’, letter, 9 July 1942, quoted in Haller, p. 192; ‘53

degrees in the sun’, Groscurth, p. 527 . 87 ‘The Russians have…’, Gefr. H. S., 389th I.D., 10 Aug. 1942,

BZG-S . 87 ‘Soviet bombers…’, BA-MA, RH27-16/42 . 88 ‘the plague of ɻies…’, Dr Günther Diez, quoted in Schneider-

Janessen, p. 130 . 88 ‘To be honest…’, 19 July 1942, TsAMO 206/294/48, p. 485 . 89 horsebrush, TsAMO 48/486/28, p. 15 . 89 ‘about this senseless task’, Podewils, p. 98 . 90 ‘hiding in a ditch’, 31 July 1942, TsAMO 206/294/47, p. 251 . 90 ‘They had a longer range…’, Freytag-Loringhoven, conversation,

23 Oct. 1995 . 91 ‘They would have quickly…’, Simonov, Raznye dni voiny,p. 180 . 92 ‘Russians resisting…’, 2, 3, 5 and 6 Aug. 1942, TsAMO

206/294/48, p. 486 . 92 night-ɹghter regiment, Sterman, conversation, 7 Nov. 1995 . 94 ‘Papa Hube’, BA-MA, RH27-16/42 . 94 ‘consuming so many…’, Behr, conversation, 25 Oct. 1995 . 94 ‘old warhorse’, Dohna-Schlobitten, conversation, 16 Oct. 1995 . 94 ‘too pessimistic’, Freytag-Loringhoven, conversation, 23 Oct.

1995 . 94 ‘Not an encouraging sight…’, Podewils, p. 85 . 95 ‘whenever a Russian…’, Metelmann, conversation, 12 Apr. 1996 . 95 ‘an enormous herd of elephants’, Seydlitz, p. 158 . 96 ‘The Russians are…’, quoted Paulus, p. 187 . 96 ‘höchst primitiv’, Podewils, p. 95 . 96 181st Riɻe Division, conversation, Tsygankov, 22 Nov. 1995 . 97 ‘the many, many…’, Sold. H. R., 9 Aug. 1942, 389th I.D., BZG-S . 97 seventy-two corpses, 24 Sept. 1942, TsAMO 62/335/7 . 97 ‘The Russians can…’, Gefr. W. V., 9 Aug. 1942, 305th I.D., BZG-

S . 97 ‘The only consolation…’, Sold. B. B., 389th I.D., 14 Aug. 1942,

BZG-S . 97 ‘workers’columns’, RTsKhIDNI 17/43/1773 . 98 petroleum-storage tanks, Nefyodova and Grebennikova,

conversation, 23 Nov. 1995 . 98 ‘Do you want to defend…?’ Albert, conversation, 23 Nov. 1995 . 98 high-school pupils, RTsKhIDNI 17/43/1774 . 99 Traitor to the Party…’, RTsKhIDNI 17/43/1774 . 99 ‘special attention to the investigation…’, Dobronin to

Shcherbakov, 18 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 240 . 99 ‘advising him to…’, RTsKhIDNI 17/43/1774 . 99 ‘political and moral degeneracy…’, RTsKhIDNI 17/43/1774 . 100 ‘the end of the world…’, Lazarev, conversation, 13 Nov. 1995 . 100 ‘After the Don…’, TsAMO 206/294/48, p. 485

CHAPTER 8 . 103 ‘a very exhilarating…’, Freytag-Loringhoven, conversation, 23 Oct. 1995 . 103 ‘General Paulus…’, Richthofen diary, 20 Aug. 1942, Paulus, p.

188 . 103 ‘to cripple…’, Richthofen diary, 23 Aug. 1942, Paulus, p. 188 . 103 ‘Make use of today!’ Podewils, p. 107 . 104 ‘in tightly packed groups’, BA-MA, RH27-16/42 . 104 ‘Stalingrad, the city of Stalin…’, BA-MA, RH20-6/216 . 104 ‘a day which…’, Gavrielova, conversation, 22 Nov. 1995 . 104 ‘Comrades, an air-raid…’, Nekrassov, p. 82 . 104 ‘not just industrial…’, Grigorev, conversation, 22 Nov. 1995 . 105 ‘literally had to drag…’, Nefyodova, conversation, 22 Nov.

1995 . 105 ‘Before ɹlling in…’, Goncharov, conversation, 23 Nov. 1995 . 106 1,600 sorties, 1,000 tons, Plocher, p. 231 . 106 ‘No one bothered…’, Goncharov, conversation, 23 Nov. 1995 . 106 ‘Around Gumrak…’, BA-MA, RH27-16/42 . 107 ‘seemed to think…’, Albert, conversation, 22 Nov. 1995 . 107 ‘Oh, they’re ɹnished now!’ Grossman papers, RGALI 618/2/108 . 107 ‘the soldiers…’, BA-MA, RH27-16/42 . 107 ‘We had started…’, Freytag-Loringhoven, conversation, 23 Oct.

1995 . 107, ‘The Volga is reached!’ BA-MA, RH20-6/216 . 107 ‘a feeling of…’, Langsdorʃ, p. 194 . 108 ‘We looked at the…’, Freytag-Loringhoven, conversation, 23

Oct. 1995 . 108 ‘the girls refused…’, Grossman papers, RGALI 618/2/108 . 108 ‘stayed at her post…’, Goncharov, conversation, 22 Nov. 1995 . 108 ‘Right until the late…’, BA-MA, RH27-16/42 . 108 ‘It is completely…’, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264 . 109 ‘We shall never surrender…’, TsMVS . 109 ‘deserted his post’, RTsKhIDNI 17/43/1773 . 110 ‘Yesterday we reached…’, Gefr. E. R. 16th Pz. Div., 25 Aug.

1942, BZG-S . 110 ‘mit Eleganz’, Gefr. B. G., 2 Sept. 1942, BZG-S . 111 ‘gunboats’, BA-MA, RH27-16/42 . 111 ‘We know how…’, Podewils, p. 117 . 112 ‘like a calm lake’, Podewils, p. 105 . 112 ‘Soon we too will…’, Gefr. B. G., 24 Aug. 1942, BZG-S . 112 ‘The song will really…’, Uʃz. W. W., 27 Aug. 1942, BZG-S . 112 ‘You can’t imagine…’, Sold. H. R., 389th I.D., 28 Aug. 1942,

BZG-S . 113 ‘very nervous’, Richthofen diary, Paulus, p. 188 . 113 ‘the closer the…’, Strecker, Haller, p. 89 . 113 ‘We will not abandon…’, 26 Aug. 1942, TsMVS . 114 ‘Many men have…’, Dobronin to Shcherbakov, 29 Oct. 1942,

TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 308 . 114 ‘Concentration of enemy…’, ÖStA-KA B/1540 . 115 ‘led a battalion…’, Dobronin to Shcherbakov, 8 Oct. 1942,

TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 78 . 115 ‘This silver streak…’, Podewils, p. 119 . 115 ‘Gentlemen, ɻying for fun…’, Einsiedel, p. 12 . 116 ‘This shitty Russia’, Uʃz. H. T., 71st I.D., 30 Aug. 1942, BZG-S . 117 ‘worried and angry’, Glichov, conversation, 6 Nov. 1995 . 117 ‘What’s the matter…’, Volkogonov, p. 461 . 118 ‘Delay at this moment’, Erickson, The Road to Stalingrad,p. 384 . 118 The Germans also suʃered…, BA-MA, RH27-16/43 . 118 ‘Hello, my dear ones!’ V. M. Kovalov, 2 Sept. 1942, AMPSB

258/4904 . 118 ‘the Volga was the last line…’, Glichov, conversation, 6 Nov.

1995 . 119 ‘but Stalingrad will…’, Gefr. B. G., 3 Sept. 1942, BZG-S . 119 ‘According to…’, Sold. W. W., 305th I.D., 2 Sept. 1942, BZG-S . 119 ‘The ring round…’, BA-MA, RH20-6/216 . 119 ‘Here, everyone…’, letter, 23 Aug. 1942, quoted in Paulus, p.

169

CHAPTER 9

. 121 ‘the fateful city’, letter, 3 Dec. 1942, Groscurth, p. 530 . 123 ‘satisfying progress…’, Haider, 7 Sept. 1942, p. 518 . 123 ‘That is a lie!’ quoted in Domarus, vol. ii, p. 1908 . 123 ‘long stare…’, Warlimont, p. 269 . 124 ‘a completely new…’, Below, p. 315 . 124 ‘The tanks are no good…’, BA-MA, RH27-16/43 . 124 ‘The Russians attacked…’, Freytag-Loringhoven, conversation,23 Oct. 1995 . 124 ‘As far as the eye…’, Gefr. O. K., 13 Sept. 1942 . 125 ‘What if your beloved…’, Stalinskoe znamia, 8 Sept. 1942 . 125 ‘Do not count days…’, Zayas, p. 169 . 125 ‘sad smell of…’, Simonov, Raznye dni voiny, vol. ii, pp. 175–6 . 127 ‘Comrade Chuikov…’, Chuikov, p. 84 . 128 ‘Time is blood’, Chuikov, p. 89 . 128 ‘to get across the Volga…’, Chuikov, p. 93 . 128 ‘experienced traitor…’, 8 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 77 . 129 ‘every German must…’, Chuikov, p. 80 . 129 ‘strong positions…’, BA-MA, RH20-6/216 . 129 ‘then fourteen days…’, Haider, p. 521 . 129 ‘A mass of Stukas…’, Gefr. H. S., 389th I.D., BZG-S . 131 ‘Yeremenko says…’, Zhukov, p. 143 . 131 ‘Both divisions…’, BA-MA, RH20-6/216 . 133 ‘Major Stalin’, S. D. Lugansky, ‘Malenkov’, in Bialer, p. 455 . 134 ‘the kites perched…’, Grossman papers, RGALI 618/2/108 . 135 ‘ɻowed from Rodimtsev…’, conversation, Kidyarov, 22 Nov.

1995 . 135 ‘Since yesterday…’, anon., 29th I.D. (mot.), 15 Sept. 1942,

BZG-S . 136 ‘he was afraid of…’, 8 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 77 . 136 ‘Instead of taking…’, 8 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 77 . 137 ‘did not agree…’, 8 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 78 . 137 ‘These clouds of earth…’, Grossman, Life and Fate,p. 35 . 138 ‘Stalingrad has been taken…’, TsAMO 3/11 556/10, quoted in Volkogonov, pp. 474–5 . 138 ‘Whenever an Me-109…’, 4 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p.

48 . 138 ‘As soon as Stuka…’, Max Plakolb, OStA-KAB/1540; Kalb

interrogation, TsAMO 48/453/13, p. 70 . 139 ‘Attack target area…’, Herbert Pabst, letters, quoted in Bähr

and Bähr, pp. 186–8 . 139 ‘The soldiers’…’, Dr Günther Diez, Schneider-Janessen, p. 130 . 141 ‘Each Guards soldier…’, conversation, Kidyarov, 22 Nov. 1995 . 142 ‘The air is ɹlled…’, BA-MA, RH27-16/42 . 142 ‘It’s not a human…’, Podewils, p. 115 . 142 ‘Home is so far…’, Herbert Pabst, quoted in Bähr and Bähr, Ρ

184 . 142 ‘Hello, my dear Palina!’, AMPSB 22789 . 142 The Germans won’t…’, AMPSB 752-/5.481 . 143 ‘left the line of defence…’, Dobronin to Stalingrad Front

Military Council, 3 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, pp. 9, 30–32

CHAPTER 10

. 145 ‘necessity of indoctrinating…’, Haider, p. 528 . 145 ‘The general staʃ…’, 19 Aug. 1942, Groscurth, p. 548 . 146 ‘ready to ɹlm…’, Dohna-Schlobitten, p. 246 . 146 ‘the battle ɻag…’., BA-MA, RH20-6/216, p. 51 . 146 ‘in much too rosy…’, quoted in Boelcke, p. 365 . 146 ‘from morning… highly nervous’, 29 Aug. 1942, Groscurth, p.

550 . 148 ‘ɹghting in the…’, Grossman papers, RGALI 618/2/108 . 148 ‘like a layered cake’, Goncharov, conversation, 25 Nov. 1995 . 148 ‘an aberration in the art of war’, Förster, ‘Evolution and

development of German doctrine…’, p. 2 . 149 ‘The enemy is…’, Strecker, Haller, p. 90 . 149 ‘Not a house is left…’, Lt Anselm Radbruch, letter, 26 Sept.

1942, Bähr and Bähr, p. 174 . 149 ‘The defenders have…’, Max Plakolb, ÖStA-KA B/1540 . 149 ‘Make a mistake…’, Smirnov, conversation, 22 Nov. 1995 . 150 ‘If only you could…’, Grossman papers, RGALI 1710/1/100 . 150 25 million rounds, BA-MA, RH20-6/216, p. 58 . 150 ‘The Russkies…’, Gefr. O. K., Pion. Bt 45, 16 Sept. 1942, BZG-S . 151 ‘We lie exhausted…’, Klaus, p. 20 . 151 ‘The Russians’ unchallenged…’, Sixth Army war diary, 15 Nov.

1942, BA-MA, RH20-6/221 . 152 ‘in Stalingrad…’, Tsygankov, conversation, 22 Nov. 1995 . 152 ‘On the other side…’, Grossman papers, RGALI 681/2/108 . 153 ‘Vanyusha…’, Tsygankov, conversation, 22 Nov. 1995 . 153 ‘Further weapon training…’, 3 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24,

p. 10 . 154 ‘the gaunt and melancholy’, Grossman papers, RGALI

618/2/108 . 154 ‘Look after your…’, TsAMO 48/486/39, p. 21 . 155 ‘covered in icicles…’, Tsygankov, conversation, 22 Nov. 1995 . 155 ‘Shells exploding…’, Col. Vishnevsky, 17 Nov. 1942, AMPSB

602/10343 . 157 ‘every imaginable sort…’, Lazar Ilich Lazarev, conversation, 13 Nov. 1995 . 157 ‘military tribunal of NKVD Forces’, RTsKhIDNI 17/43/1773 . 157 ‘physically and spiritually…’, Gavrielova, conversation, 22

Nov. 1995 . 157 ‘brought over a hundred…’, and ‘threw grenades…’, TsMVS . 157 Kochnevskaya, 21 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 268 . 158 ‘thousands of wounded…’, Sterman, conversation, 7 Nov. 1995 . 158 ‘They often closed…’, Professor Krimskaya, quoted in

Schneider-Janessen, p. 134 . 158 Yekaterina Petlyuk, John Erickson, ‘Soviet women in war’, in

Garrard and Garrard (eds.), p. 66 . 158 ‘I had never seen…’, Simonov, Raznye dni voiny,p. 187 . 159 ‘In hospital…’, Grossman papers, RGALI 1710/1/100 . 159 ‘socialist competition’, Dobronin to Shcherbakov, 28 Oct. 1942,

TsAMO 48/486/24, pp. 297–8 . 159 ‘If they don’t…’, 4 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 47 . 160 ‘it seemed as though…’, Maj. V. Velichko, ‘The 62nd Army’, in

USSR, Stalingrad,p. 148 . 161 ‘white symmetrical…’, Nekrassov, p. 82 . 162 ‘Russian women…’, Uʃz. Hans Urban, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264, p.

89 . 162 ‘One more battle…’, Chuikov, p. 167 . 162 ‘You can’t imagine…’, Gefr. H. S., 389th I.D., BZG-S . 163 ‘the confusing…’, Viktor Kainzer, Jäg.-Rgt 54, Stalingradbund

Österreich, May 1984 . 164 ‘Where are you?’ Chuikov, p. 184 . 164 ‘For the defenders…’, 17 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 216 . 165 ‘no man will shift…’, quoted in Domarus, vol. ii, pp. 1914,

1916 CHAPTER 11

. 166 ‘We Russians were…’, Smirnov, conversation, 22 Nov. 1995 . 166 ‘In the blazing city…’, Chuikov, p. 223 . 166 ‘Those who do not…’, Stalinskoe znamia, 4 Sept. 1942 . 166 ‘the defeatist mood…’, 8 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 74 . 167 German tanks protect deserters, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 20 . 167 Deserters from 124th Special Brigade, 3 Oct. 1942, Dobronin to

Stalingrad Front Military Council, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 8 . 167 ‘Since their last…’, BA-MA, RH27-16/43 . 167 ‘he was arrested…’, BA-MA, RH27-16/43 . 167 ‘Morale among…’, Uʃz. J. Sch., 79th I.D., 22 Sept. 1942, BZG-S . 168 178th Reserve Riɻe Regt, Dobronin to Shcherbakov, 21 Oct.

1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 239 . 168 ‘citizens of Stalingrad…’, 13 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p.

162; 8 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 77 . 168 ‘A shortage of…’, 8 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 77 . 168 ‘It was impossible…’, 26 Nov.1942, TsAMO48/486/25,

pp.317–18 . 169 ‘If I am sent to the…’, 16 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p.

209 . 169 ‘the carelessness…’, 13 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 165 . 169 ‘an extreme measure…’, 15 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p.

201 . 169 ‘During the night…’, 13 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 165 . 170 ‘It is hard for them…’, 11 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, pp.

138–9 . 170 ‘received such…’, 14 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 183 . 170 ‘To indoctrinate…’, 14 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 185 . 170 ‘He announced that…’, 15 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p.

176 . 170 ‘It is very diɽcult…’, 13 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 163 . 170 ‘In battle conditions…’, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 79 . 171 ‘criminal disorder…’, 23 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 292 . 171 446 desertions, TsAMO 48/486/29, p. 49 . 171 ‘a protective zone…’, 15 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 187 . 171 ‘tried to hide…’, 8 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 82 . 171 ‘Eleven soldiers…’, 25 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 259 . 172 ‘a sign of cowardice…’, 7 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p.

106 . 172 ‘men found with…’, 18 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 240 . 172 ‘discredited the leaders…’, 8 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24,

pp. 82–3 . 172 ‘When soldiers mutter…’, Nikolay Filin, ‘Kak i pochemu ya byl

agentom SMERSh’, Vechernyaya Moskva, 25 Nov. 1995 . 173 ‘nine grams of lead’, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 162 . 173 ‘thanks to…’, Dobronin to Shcherbakov, 8 Oct. 1942, TsAMO

48/486/24, p. 76; 18 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 236 . 173 ‘To be honest…’, quoted in Garrard and Garrard, p. 155 . 173 ‘cemented the stones…’, Maj. V. Velichko, ‘The 62nd Army’, in

USSR, Stalingrad,p. 145 . 174 ‘Life is not easy…’, Grossman papers, RGALI 1710/1/100 . 175 ‘only ɹfty yards out…’, Goncharov, conversation, 24 Nov. 1995 . 175 ‘Today I saw…’, Uʃz. H. D., 295th I.D., 6 Nov. 1942, BZG-S . 176 ‘We crossed a bridge…’, Simonov, 25 Sept. 1942, in USSR,

Stalingrad,p. 60 . 176 ‘these things cannot be helped…’, Simonov, 25 Sept. 1942, in

USSR, Stalingrad,p. 64 . 177 ‘The enemy…’, 5 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 63 . 177 ‘suitable’, VOTsDNI, 113/14/306L, quoted in Epifanov, p. 136 . 178 ‘the majority aged between…’, from the interrogation of

Mikhail Bulanov, 3 Dec. 1943, quoted in Klee and Dressen (eds.),

p. 95 . 178 ‘in hopeless cases…’, Podewils, p. 131 . 178 ‘a huge black crowd’, Nefyodova, conversation, 23 Nov. 1995 . 179 ‘no one knows how’, Goncharov, conversation, 24 Nov. 1995 . 179 ‘signalling to the enemy…’, Dobronin to Stalingrad Front

Military Council, 3 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, pp. 9, 32 . 179 270,000 Ukrainians, BA-MA Wi ID/33, in Sergei Kudryashov,

‘The hidden dimension’, in Erickson and Dilks, p. 242 . 179 800 Ukrainian youths, VOTsDNI, 113/14/306, pp. 75–90,

Epifanov, p. 153 . 180 Stalingrad campaign interrogations of German and allied PoWs,

TsAMO

62/335/7,48/453/13,206/294/12,206/294/47,206/294/48,

226/335/7 . 180 ‘Older soldiers…’, captured 16 Sept. 1942, TsAMO 48/453/13,

p. 36 . 180 Kaplan interrogations, TsAMO 48/453/13, pp. 75, 46, 48 . 181 ‘very energetic measures…’, 7 Aug. 1942, 14th Pz. Div.,

RTsKhIDNI 17/125/96 . 181 ‘How can we possibly…’, RTsKhIDNI 17/125/97 . 182 ‘God keep me alive…’, RTsKhIDNI 17/125/97 . 182 ‘God, don’t let…’, RTsKhIDNI 17/125/97 . 182 ‘You should…’, 30 July 1942, TsAMO 206/294/48, p. 466 . 183 ‘We did not ɹre…’, TsAMO 206/294/47, p. 251 . 183 991 Special Strafbattalion, RTsKhIDNI 17/125/97 . 183 ‘Russian agents…’, TsAMO 48/453/21, p. 96 . 184 ‘lords and vassals’, Klaus, p. 23 . 184 ‘Above all…’, Stolberg report, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264, p. 161 . 184 ‘one for oɽcers…’, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264, p. 156 . 184 ‘To avoid in future…’, 19 Sept. 1941, 3rd Rom. Army to 13th

Rom.

D., RTsKhIDNI, 171/125/96 . 184 ‘It is disturbing…’, 25 Oct. 1942, Groscurth, p. 552 . 184 50,000 Russian auxiliaries, Kehrig, pp. 662-3; see also Rüdiger Overmans, ‘Das andere Gesicht des Krieges’, in Förster (ed.), Stalingrad,p. 441 . 184 ‘Russians in the German…’, 4 Mar. 1943, TsAMO 226/335/7,

p. 364 . 185 ‘We believed the leaɻets…’, RTsKhIDNI 17/125/97 . 186 ‘Ivan’, conversation, Henry Metelmann, 12 Apr. 1996 . 186 ‘On some parts…’, 8 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 81

CHAPTER 12

. 187 ‘Will Stalingrad…’, letter to his brother, Groscurth, p. 528 . 187 ‘the dark towering bulk…’, Grossman papers, RGALI,

628/2/108 . 188 ‘The Russians made…’, Uʃz. Philipp Westrich, Iooth jäger

Division, A-MA, RW4/V. 264, p. 86 . 189 ‘dogged, rugged…’, Grossman papers, RGALI 618/2/108 . 190 ‘As soon as dusk falls…’, Grossman papers, RGALI 618/2/108 . 191 overloaded boat, 15 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 162 . 191 ‘encircle mineɹelds…’, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 66 . 191 ‘drunk themselves out…’, TsAMO 48/486/39, p. 22 . 191 ‘the infantry company…’, Dobronin to Shcherbakov, 15 Oct.

1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 188, and 48/486/28, p. 216 . 192 ‘which signiɹes…’, Sixth Army war diary, 10 Oct. 1942, BA-

MA, RH20-6/221 . 192 ‘The whole sky…’, Gefr. H. S., 389th I.D., 14 Oct. 1942, BZG-S . 193 ‘The ɹghting assumed…’, Maj. V. Velichko, ‘The 62nd Army’,

in USSR, Stalingrad,p. 149 . 193 ‘Those of us…’, Dobronin to Shcherbakov, 15 Oct. 1942,

TsAMO 48/486/24, p.189 . 193 ‘Our support…’, Uʃz. H. G., 305th I.D., 24 Oct. 1942, BZG-S . 193 ‘It was a terrible…’, Grams, p. 54 . 194 ‘The major part…’, Sixth Army war diary, BA-MA, RH20-6/221 . 194 ‘more than thirty medium…’, TsAMO 48/486/35, pp. 212–13 . 194 ‘Guns destroyed…’, TsAMO 48/486/35, p. 214 . 194 ‘real mass heroism’, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 200 . 195 ‘Factory walls…’, Strecker, quoted in Haller, p. 90 . 195 ‘Our General…’, Sold. H. R., 389th I.D., 14 Oct. 1942, BZG-S . 195 ‘The help of our ɹghter…’, TsAMO 48/486/35, p. 212 . 195 ‘I cannot understand…’, Herbert Pabst, 18 Oct. 1942, Bähr and

Bähr, p. 188 . 196 ‘hundreds of wounded…’, Chuikov, p. 203 . 197 ‘exceptional cowardice’, Koshcheev to Shcherbakov, 9 Nov.

1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 117 . 198 ‘Communist-infected circles’, Boelcke, p. 384 . 199 ‘Hello, Shura!’ RGALI 1284/2/3466 . 199 ‘I’m getting along…’, Grossman papers, RGALI 618/2/108 . 199 ‘we are constantly…’, 12 Oct. 1942, AMPSB 7555/13530 . 199 ‘Mariya…’, 23 Oct. 1942, AMPSB 7555/13530 . 200 ‘People might reproach me…’, AMPSB, quoted in Volgograd

University history department project . 200 ‘I often ask myself…’, Leutnant Otten, AMPSB, quoted in

Volgograd University history department project . 200 ‘I can’t stop worrying…’, to Josef Joʃner from his wife in

Nuremberg, AMPSB N45079A . 200 ‘Aunt Lyuba…’, 11 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 139 . 200 ‘the wounded caught…’, 7 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p.

117 . 201 ‘In 62nd Army alone…’, 11 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, pp.

138–9 . 201 ‘In the occupied…’, 11 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 151 . 202 ‘absolutely incorrect attitude’ and ‘unnecessary appendix’, 14

Nov. 1942, Koshcheev to Shcherbakov, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 179 . 202 ‘Without my permission…’, Koshcheev to Shcherbakov, 21

Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 262 . 202 ‘because now that they…’, 14 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25,

pp. 179–80 . 202 ‘a counter-revolutionary statement’, Dobronin to Shcherbakov,

18 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 249 . 202 ‘They’ve invented the Orders…’, Dobronin to Shcherbakov, 15

Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p. 162 . 202 ‘criminal carelessness’, 15 Oct. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/24, p.

344 . 202 medal in vodka, Lazarev, conversation, 13 Nov. 1995 . 203 ‘a new wave of…’, 4 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, pp. 176–7 . 203 ‘noble sniper’, 10 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 122 . 204 ‘Rus, komm, komm!’ 6 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, pp. 76–7 . 204 ‘Fascists should know…’, 4 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p.

58 . 204 ‘learned the dark sides of life’, Grossman papers, RGALI

618/2/108 . 205 Manenkov, 17 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 216 . 205 ‘still the best…’, 12 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 144 . 205 ‘In war…’, Grossman papers, RGALI, 1710/1/100 . 206 ‘formerly workers…’, 4 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 52 . 206 ‘so close to the…’, Hptm. Kempter, quoted in Hauck, pp. 74–5 . 206 ‘the dogs ɹght…’, Gefr. H. S., 389th I.D., 5 Nov. 1942, BZG-S . 207 ‘We felt at home in the dark’, Chuikov, p. 211 . 207 ‘Father…’, Gefreiter Gelman to his family, AMPSB, quoted in

Volgograd University history department project . 207 ‘Don’t worry…’, Grossman papers, RGALI 1710/1/100 . 207 ‘Here a saying…’, Sold. K. H. 113th I.D., 27 Oct. 1942, BZG-S CHAPTER 13

. 208 Munich Oktoberfest, BA-MA, N395/9 . 208 ‘It’s not an…’, Sold. K. H., 113th I.D., 27 Oct. 1942, BZG-S . 208 ‘We really need…’, Uʃz. H. D., 295th I.D., 6 Nov. 1942, BZG-S . 209 ‘a highly active defence’, 14 Oct. 1942, BA-MA, RH20-6/220 . 209 How to Construct…, BA-MA, RH20-6/238, p. 197 . 209 ‘The Führer has…’, 7 Nov. 1942, Groscurth, p. 529 . 209 ‘rises and falls…’, Uʃz. W. B. 371st I.D., 26 Oct. 1942, BZG-S . 209 ‘Here one must…’, Uʃz. A. R., 60th I.D. (mot.), 19 Nov. 1942,

BZG-S . 209 ‘most beautiful festival…’, Uʃz. H. B., 371st I.D., 28 Oct. 1942,

BZG-S . 209 ‘requirements for…’, 3 Nov. 1942, BA-MA, RH27-24/3 . 210 ‘who have been in the…’, AOK 6, 29 Oct. 1942, BA-MA, RH20-

6/220 . 210 ‘It’s a typically German aʃair…’, Pabst, p. 121 . 210 ‘For the time being…’, Uʃz. A. R., 60th I.D. (mot.), 19 Nov.

1942, BZG-S . 210 ‘Jaundice especially…’, Klaus, p. 21 . 211 ‘Fieberkurve’ and ‘the troops’ reduced…’, Dr Dormanns, 28 Jan.

1943, quoted in Schneider-Janessen, p. 132 . 211 ‘fearless commander…’, Koshcheev to Shcherbakov, 4 Nov.

1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, pp. 61–2 . 211 ‘The eʃect of massed…’, KTB AOK 6, BA-MA, RH20-6/221 . 212 ‘In the last two days…’, 6 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, . 69 p. 212 ‘to install…’, 7 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 101 . 212 ‘heavy enemy night bombing…’, Sixth Army war diary, 1 Nov.

1942, BA-MA, RH20-6/221 . 212 ‘Along the whole…’, 7 Nov. 1942, Groscurth, p. 529 . 212 ‘exceeding…’, 6 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 70 . 212 ‘out of 1,697 Komsomol…’, TsAMO 48/486/10, p. 275 . 212 ‘got drunk’, report of 11 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 142 . 213 ‘anti-chemical liquids’, 23 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, pp.

291–3 . 213 ‘I wanted to reach…’, quoted in Domarus, vol. ii, pp. 1937–8 . 214 ‘Hitler refused outright…’, Below, p. 322 . 214 ‘The ice ɻoes collide…’, Grossman papers, RGALI 618/2/108 . 214 Volga steamers, Grossman papers, RGALI 618/12/21 . 215 347th Riɻe Regt, 7 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 101 . 215 signal ɻares, 10 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 122 . 215 ‘Rus! Don’t shoot!’, 7 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 115 . 215 ‘it was noticed…’, 10 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 122 . 216 ‘army conventionality’, Richthofen diary, 1 Nov. 1942, Paulus,

p. 190 . 217 ‘hurricane of ɹre’, and ‘Begin shelling…’, 15 Nov. 1942,

TsAMO 48/486/25, pp. 197–8 .217 ‘If they can’t…’, Richthofen diary, 16 Nov. 1942, in Paulus, p.

191 . 218 ‘Hitler was obsessed…’, Behr, conversation, 25 Oct. 1995 . 218 ‘42 percent of his battalions…’, Philippi and Heim, p. 177 . 218 ‘all the trials…’, Seydlitz, p. 164 . 218 ‘These were diʃerent…’, Glichov, conversation, 6 Nov. 1995 . 219 ‘not in the air, but at the Germans’, 13 Nov. 1942, TsAMO

48/486/25, p. 155

CHAPTER 14

. 220 ‘And what…’, Zhukov, p. 140; Erickson, The Road to Stalingrad, p. 389 . 221 ‘shift the strategic…’, Zhukov, p. 140 . 221 ‘deep operations’, Erickson, ‘The development of Soviet military doctrine’, p. 5 . 222 ‘a regime of the strictest secrecy’, Vasilevsky, p. 189 . 223 ‘but Zhukov was Zhukov’, Glichov, conversation, 6 Nov. 1995 . 223 Soviet tank production ɹgures, Erickson, The Road to

Stalingrad,Ρ 375 . 224 ‘ɹghters in overalls’, quoted in John Erickson, ‘Soviet women at

war’, in Garrard and Garrard, p. 50 . 224 ‘What was Your Help to the Front?’, TsMVS . 224 ‘For the death of enemies…’ and ‘4,363…’, Ehrenburg papers,

RGALI 1204/2/3453 . 225 ‘within ɹfteen miles…’, RTsKhIDNI 17/43/1773 . 227 ‘greatest feat was…’, Glantz, Soviet Military Deception in the

Second World War,p. 113 . 227 ‘My dear friend…’, Behr, conversation, 25 Oct. 1995 . 230 ‘the Third Romanian…’, Sixth Army war diary, BA-MA, RH20-

6/221 . 230 ‘On the Don…’, Richthofen diary, 12 Nov. 1942, Paulus, p. 191 . 230 ‘Weather…’, Richthofen diary, 14 Nov. 1942, Paulus, p. 191 . 230 Khrushchev and Yeremenko at Svetly-Yar, 18 Nov. 1942,

TsAMO 48/486/25, p.230 . 231 ‘on a wild-goose chase’, Metelmann, conversation, 12 Apr.

1996 . 231 ‘Hitler was misinformed…’, Below, p. 322 . 232 On receiving…’, Sixth Army war diary, BA-MA, RH20-6/221 . 232 81st Cavalry Division, 10 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p.

123, and 21 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 279 . 232 ‘In the next few days…’, 10 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p.

129 . 233 ‘We could tell…’, Zhukov, p. 169 . 233 ‘defeatism and…’, Koshcheev to Shcherbakov, 28 Nov. 1942,

TsAMO 48/486/25, pp. 355–6 . 234 ‘knew something was…’, Glichov, 6 Nov. 1995 . 234 I am well aware of the…’, RTsKhIDNI 17/125/96 . 235 119 ɹeld hospitals, Schneider-Janessen, p. 135 . 235 ‘as a physician would…’, Lt-Gen. A. Rodin, in USSR, Stalingrad,p. 109 . 235 ‘Along the whole…’, BA-MA, RH20-6/221 . 235 ‘2,053 miles from the German…’, Golovchanski, p. 133

CHAPTER 15

. 239 ‘According to the statement…’, BA-MA, RH20-6/221 . 239 ‘as thick as milk’, Lt-Gen. A. Rodin, in USSR, Stalingrad,p. 110 . 240 ‘I have the impression…’, Behr, conversation, 25 Oct. 1995 . 240 ‘because the ground…’, Dr Hans Heinz Schrömbgens, quoted in

Schneider-Janessen, p. 135 . 240 ‘I don’t know’, Glichov, conversation, 6 Nov. 1995 . 240 ‘there will be a holiday…’, quoted in Chuikov, p. 235 . 241 ‘The attack…’, Hptm. Krauss, BA-MA, RH19 VI/11, p. 251 . 241 ‘Sappers, jump oʃ!’, Smirnov, conversation, 22 Nov. 1995 . 244 ‘Once again…’, Richthofen diary, 19 Nov. 1942, quoted in

Paulus, p. 192 . 244 ‘up to now…’, Sixth Army war diary, BA-MA, RH20-6/221 . 244 ‘an enemy…’, 11.30, 19 Nov. 1942, BA-MA, RH20-6/221 . 244 ‘boxes of ɹles’, Krauss, report, BA-MA, RH19 VI/11, p. 251 . 246 ‘It is not even possible…’, Richthofen diary, 19 Nov. 1942,

quoted in Paulus, p. 192 . 247 ‘Hopefully…’, General von Richthofen diary, 19 Nov. 1942,

Paulus, p. 192 . 247 ‘Change of situation…’, 22.00, 19 Nov. 1942, BA-MA, RH20-

6/221 . 247 ‘in whose ranks…’, BA-MA, RH27-16/42 . 247 ‘move out’, Gefr. Joachim Grunow, Pz. Regt 2, report, 1 Aug.

1943, BA-MA, RH27-16/43 . 248 ‘no particular…’, quoted in Beck, pp. 169–70 . 248 ‘masses of…’, Gebele, quoted in Beck, p. 170 . 249 13th Tank Brigade, 64th Army, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 303 . 249 ‘The Romanians…’, Gebele, quoted in Beck, p. 170 . 249 157th Riɻe Division, 23 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 290 . 249 64th Army wounded, 25 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 303 .249 ‘that the long-awaited…’, 20 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/28, p.

275 . 249 ‘happiest day of the whole war’, Lazarev, conversation, 7 Nov.

1995 . 249 ‘panzer-fright’, quoted in Kehrig, p. 148 . 250 ‘Antonescu kaputt!’ 23 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 287 . 250 ‘cases of chaos…’, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 287 . 251 ‘ɻeeing wildly…’, report of Hptm. Gürtler, BA-MA, RW4/V.

264, p. 85 . 251 ‘much material…’, report, Lt Graf Stolberg, 17 Feb. 1943, BA-

MA, RW4/V. 264, p. 157 . 251 ‘The catastrophic…’, 22 Nov. 1942, 24th Pz. Div., RH27-24/5 . 252 ‘the road is strewn…’, Grossman papers, RGALI 618/2/108 . 252 ‘staʃ papers scattered…’, USSR, Stalingrad,p. 112 . 253 ‘a not unfavourable…’, Kehrig, p. 160 . 253 ‘Paulus and Schmidt had…’, Behr, conversation, 25 Oct. 1995 . 254 ‘for him an…’, Richthofen diary, 23 Nov. 1942, Paulus, p. 225 . 254 ‘Sixth Army stand…’, 15.25, 21 Nov. 1942, Kehrig, p. 163 . 255 ‘The ɹrst news…’, report of Hptm. Wassermann, 16th Pz. Div.,

2 Aug. 1943, RH27-16/43 . 256 ‘We’re surrounded!’ Grams, p. 58 . 256 ‘A sombre Totensonntag…’, letter, 3 Dec. 1942, Bàhr and Bähr,

p. 189 .256 ‘We became very much…’, Freytag-Loringhoven, conversation, 23 Oct. 1995 . 256 ‘We will continue to ɹght…’, quoted in Axworthy, p. 96 . 257 ‘… is the oʃensive…’, (original German), Ehrenburg papers,

RGALI 1207/2/3477 . 257 ‘as if it were 1870’, Stolberg, 17 Feb. 1943, BA-MA, RW4/V.

264, p. 157 . 257 ‘When the retreat started…’, TsAMO 206/294/47, p. 147 . 257 ‘Only two out of…’, Werth, The Year of Stalingrad,p. 369 . 258 ‘extraordinarily rapid’, BA-MA, N395/11 . 259 ‘The numerous Romanians’, Dohna-Schlobitten, p. 256 . 259 ‘especially the frantic…’, Lt Walter Öhme, Pz. Regt 2, report,

28 July 1943, BA-MA, RH27-16/43 . 260 ‘Here everything’s…’, Uʃz. Römer, report, 23 May 1943, BA-

MA, RH27-16/43 . 261 ‘Right on towards the Don’ (original German), Ehrenburg

papers, RGALI 1207/2/3477 . 261 ‘A number of tanks…’, Gefr. Joachim Grunow, Panzer Regt 2,

report, I Aug. 1943, BA-MA, RH27-16/43 . 261 ‘last resort’, Dohna-Schlobitten, p. 253 .262 ‘Everyone was running…’, Uʃz. Römer, report, 23 May 1943,

BA-MA, RH27-16/43 . 262 ‘all items…’, Dohna-Schlobitten, p. 255 . 262 ‘the very same bridge…’, II./Pz. Gren. Rgt 64, BA-MA, RH27-

16/43 . 262 ‘very proud’, report, Oberfeldwebel Wallrawe, BA-MA, RH27-

16/43 . 262 ‘I feel much better…’, Dmitry Venkutov, 26 Nov. 1942, AMPSB

11480 . 263 ‘The battles are strong…’, AMPSB 602/10343 . 263 ‘old women’s kerchiefs…’, Grossman papers, RGALI 1710/1/101 . 263 450 collaborators, VOTsDNI 113/14/306, p. 94, quoted in

Epifanov, p. 142 . 264 ‘in a serious condition…’, 25 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p.

304 . 264 ‘owing to…’, Dohna-Schlobitten, p. 258

CHAPTER 16

. 266 ‘I’ve got them!’ Albert Speer, quoted in Sereny, p. 207 . 266 ‘alarming news…’, 19 Nov. 1942, KTB-OKW, vol. ii, 1942, p.

988 . 267 ‘alterations to…’, Bradley and Schulze-Kossens (eds.), p. 22 . 267 ‘temporary encirclement’, BA-MA, RH20-6/241 . 267 ‘It’s impossible…’, General von Richthofen diary, Paulus, p.

224 . 267 ‘We have nothing…’, BA-MA, N601/v. 4, p. 3 . 268 ‘Decision with reasons, please!’ BA-MA, N6oI/v. 3, pp. 12, 13.

This conversation was reconstructed and agreed by both Schmidt

and Pickert, working together on 7 Jan. 1963, after they had

consulted all the available documents to refresh their memories. . 269 wine and champagne, conversation, Behr, and BA-MA,

N395/12 . 269 ‘They all shared…’, Schmidt, BA-MA, N601/v. 4, p. 7 . 269 ‘Army surrounded’, quoted in Kehrig, pp. 559–60 . 269 ‘The Sixth Army is…’, BA-MA, RH20-6/238 . 270 ‘We’ve found…’, Zeitzler, Kehrig, p. 196 . 270 ‘whatever the circumstances’, Kehrig, p. 562 . 270 ‘highly paid NCOs’, 25 Nov. 1942, Paulus, p. 227 . 271 ‘completely unthinkable’, Seydlitz, p. 193 . 271 ‘Already the minor…’, 25 Nov. 1942, BA-MA, N372/12, p. 2 . 271 ‘In thousands of…’, Toepke, p. 44 . 272 ‘Now that you have…’, conversation, 25 Oct. 1995 . 272 ‘According to a Führer decree…’, Sixth Army, 6 Dec. 1942, BA-

MA, RH20-6/239, p. 135 . 272 propaganda leaɻets, 23 Nov. 1942, TsAMO 48/486/25, p. 277 . 272 ‘The Führer ordered…’, Bradley and Schulze-Kossens, p. 26 . 272 ‘the grateful army…’, letter, 15 Nov. 1942, Groscurth, p. 530 . 274 ‘And be warned…’, Stahlberg, p. 212 p. 274 ‘When we

entered…’, Stahlberg, p. 217 . 275 ‘the troops in the area…’, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264 . 275 ‘The whole Sixth Army…’, Henry Holze, in Kruse, p. 14 . 275 ‘Yesterday and today…’, 26 Nov. 1942, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264 . 275 ‘the most diɽcult question…’, Strecker, quoted in Haller, p. 96 . 276 ‘Such an action…’, BA-MA, N601/v. 4, p. 13 . 276 ‘I know that…’, Paulus, p. 83 . 276 ‘Prussian ɹeld marshals…’, Rudolph-Christoph Freiherr von

Gersdorʃ, Soldat im Untergang: Lebensbilder,p. 134 . 276 ‘march out…’, Behr, conversation, 25 Oct. 1995 . 276 ‘Hold on…’, Paulus, order, 27 Nov. 1942, BA-MA, RH20-6/238 . 276 Schmidt denial, BA-MA N601/v. 10, p. 12 . 277 ‘We’re never going…’, Klaus, p. 35

CHAPTER 17

. 278 ‘A systematic withdrawal…’, Wallrawe, BA-MA, RH27-16/43 . 278 ‘artillery and infantry…’, TsAMO 48/486/13, p. 472 . 279 ‘The bolsheviks…’, Stolberg, report, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264, p.

159 . 279 ‘It is said…’, TsAMO 206/294/47, Ρ·108 . 279 ‘doubts about…’, Oblt. v.d. Sode, 16th Panzer Division, report,

12 Aug. 1943, BA-MA, RH27-16/43 . 280 ‘Since the…’, Sold. K. P., 376th I.D., 14 Dec. 1942, BZG-S . 280 ‘Rations cut…’, BA-MA, RH20-6/237 . 280 ‘It was defeatism…’, anonymous conversation . 281 ‘But surely it doesn’t matter…’, anonymous conversation . 281 forty-two air raids, Romer, report, 23 May 1943, BA-MA,

RH27-16/43 . 283 ‘The commanding oɽcer…’, Kurt Reuber, letter, 18 Dec. 1942,

Bähr and Bähr, p. 192 . 284 ‘Miserably frozen…’ (original German), Ehrenburg papers,

RGALI, 1207/2/3477 . 284 ‘We squat…’, Reuber, letter, 3 Dec. 1942, quoted in Bähr and

Bähr, p. 190 . 284 ‘The plague of lice…’, report, OGefr. Heinrich, Pz. Regt 2, 28

July 1943, BA-MA, RH27-16/43 . 284 ‘Underneath the lantern…’ (original German), TsAMO

206/294/48, Ρ. 452 . 285 ‘Because of bad communications…’, TsAMO 48/486/13, p. 472 . 285 ‘The failure of oɽcers and commissars…’, TsAMO 48/486/13,

p. 472 . 286 ‘These Russians…’, Einsiedel, Tagebuch der Versuchung,p. 110 . 286 ‘a tremendous education for victory…’, Zhukov, p. 151 . 286 ‘The morale of…’, Grossman papers, RGALI 1710/1/101 . 287 ‘We were like gypsies…’, Glichov, conversation, 6 Nov. 1995 . 287 spotted ‘a white mug with a rose’, Glichov, conversation, 14

Nov. 1995 . 288 ‘When I killed…’, Lazarev, conversation, 13 Nov. 1995 . 288 ‘A soldier felt…’, Lazarev, conversation, 13 Nov. 1995 . 289 ‘very diɽcult’, Lazarev, conversation, 13 Nov. 1995 . 290 ‘Listen, Herr General…’, Strecker, quoted in Haller, p. 97 . 290 ‘Things seem…’, Groscurth, 3 Dec. 1942, p. 530 CHAPTER 18

. 291 ‘I can’t remain…’, 11 Dec. 1942, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264, p. 212 . 292 captured pilot, Obergefreiter Paul German (sic), TsAMO

48/453/13, p. 261 . 293 ‘The trapped German forces…’, Zhukov, 29 Nov. 1942, p. 178 . 296 ‘cornerstone’, quoted Paulus, p. 235 . 296 ‘He described…’, Raus bequest, ÖStA-KA B/186: III . 297 ‘Intention: Fourth…’, BA-MA, RH19 VI, p. 60 . 297 ‘Order for…’, General Raus, ÖStA-KA B/186: III . 298 ‘Once a unit…’, Gilbert (ed.), p. 17 . 298 ‘a gigantic…’, Raus, ÖStA-KA B/186: III . 300 ‘Around the runway…’, Rohden, p. 46 . 301 ‘Right down to…’, General Raus, ÖStA-KA B/186: III . 302 ‘Yesterday and today…’, Kolya Batyuk, 18 Dec. 1942, AMPSB

488/7955(5) . 303 ‘a steadily increasing…’, Wolfgang Eckart, ‘Von der Agonie

einer missbrauchten Armee’, in Wette and Ueberschär (eds.), p.

109 . 304 ‘without having received…’, Professor Dr Hans Girgensohn,

‘Der Hungertod in Stalingrad: Die Geschichte seiner

Entdeckung’, privately published, 1992 . 304 ‘The suspected causes…’, Girgensohn, ibid.

. 304 ‘a large-scale experiment…’, 6 Jan. 1943, BA-MA, RH20-6/796 . 304 ‘luxurious’, Prof. Dr Hans Girgensohn, conversation, 22 Apr.

1996 . 306 ‘stress illness’, Girgensohn, conversation, 22 Apr. 1996 . 306 rats deprived of sleep, Dr Susan Greenɹeld in the Royal

Institution Christmas Lecture, 28 Dec. 1994 . 306 ‘There’s little new…’, Lt W. M., 22 Dec. 1942, BZG-S . 306 ‘Slowly, our brave…’, 30 Dec. 1942, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264 . 307 ‘There stands a soldier…’, Sepp Wirrer, ‘Das Wolgalied’, Kamerad-schaft Stalingrad, Aug./Sept. 1983 . 307 German Communists, Korfes, undated ms. in MGFA-P; and

Dyatlenko ms.

. 308 ‘crackling sound of the propaganda voice’, Hans Schmieder ms. . 308 ‘the ones with the…’, 6 Dec. 1942, TsAMO 206/294/47, p. 102 . 308 ‘Soldiers eagerly…’, 16 Sept. 1942, TsAMO 48/453/13, p. 36 . 308 ‘“If German soldiers…”’, TsAMO 48/486/13, p. 488 . 308 ‘Can one serve two masters?’ Strecker, quoted in Haller, p. 97 . 309 ‘the chances of a…’, Freytag-Loringhoven, conversation, 23

Oct. 1995 . 309 ‘We survivors…’, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264 . 309 ‘a break-out…’, Beck, ÖStA-AdR 522 . 309 ‘Every step was exhausting,’ Behr conversation, 25 Oct. 1995

CHAPTER 19

. 311 ‘just like at home’, Kurt Reuber, letter, 25 Dec. 1942, quoted in Bähr and Bähr, p. 195 . 312 ‘in the German way…’, 24 Dec. 1942, BA-MA, N395/12 . 313 ‘Odu fröhliche’, Kurt Reuber, letter, 25 Dec. 1942, Bähr and

Bähr, Ρ· 195 . 313 ‘with husky voices’, Walter Kuber, ‘Von Weihnachten 1942 bis

zumeiner Gefangennahme am 31.1.1943’, in Beck, p. 193 . 313 ‘It is a…’, Strecker, quoted in Haller, p. 102 . 313 ‘the divisional commander…’, Heinrich Simonmeier, Uʃz.,

report, 29 July 1943, BA-MA, RH27-16/43 . 313 ‘No supply ɻights…’, BA-MA, RH20-6/236 . 313 ‘If we do not receive…’, BA-MA, RH20-6/240 . 314 ‘In our hearts…’, Oberstabarzt Dr Carl Otto Marckstadt, quoted

in Schneider-Janessen, p. 146 . 314 ‘Christmas naturally…’, letter, 28 Dec. 1942, quoted in Paulus, p. 89 . 314 ‘Darling!…’, Dmitry Venkutov to his wife, 24 Dec. 1942,

AMPSB 11480 . 314 ‘Hello Mariya’, 24 Dec. 1942, AMPSB 739/13529 . 315 ‘After reɻecting…’, Toepke, p. 83 . 315 ‘Thus a dozen…’, Hptm. d.R. Czygan, 8 Jan. 1943, BA-MA,

RW4/v. 264, p. 205 . 315 ‘Bloody losses…’, BA-MA, RH20-6/237 . 316 ‘all the necessary…’, Adam, Der schwere Entschluss,p. 264 . 316 ‘that Hitler…’, Dohna-Schlobitten, conversation, 16 Oct. 1995 . 316 ‘372 tanks…’, BA-MA, RH19 VI/7, p. 59, and RH19 VI/8, p. 38 . 316 ‘The enemy used…’, Uʃz. Hans Urban, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264,

pp. 88–91 . 317 ‘Our will for victory…’, 31 Dec. 1942, BA-MA, RH20-6/240, p.

119 . 317 ‘a powerful…’, Daniels to wife, 1 Jan. 1943, BA-MA, N395/12 . 318 ‘Celebrating the New Year…’, letter, 9 Jan. 1943, Shindel’, p.

45 . 318 ‘Dear Parents, I’m all right…’, AMPSB N45079A . 318 ‘In the name of…’, BA-MA, RH20-6/236 .318 ‘Mein Führer! 1 Jan. 1943, BA-MA, RH20-6/236 . 318 ‘We’re not…’; ‘We are maintaining…’; ‘The Führer knows…’,

BA-MA, RW4/V. 264 . 319 ‘New hope arises…’, Strecker, Haller, p. 102 . 319 ‘following radio…’, BA-MA, RH20-6/240, pp. 77, 86 . 319 ‘with Luftwaʃe…’, Wallrawe, RH27-16/43 . 320 ‘I don’t like the…’, V. Barsov, letter of 9 Jan. 1943, Shindel’, p.

45 . 320 ‘The Russians began…’, Max Plakolb, ÖStA-KA B/1540 . 320 ‘Army starving and frozen…’, BA-MA, RH20-6/244D . 320 ‘From the command post…’, Opolchentsy ν boyakh za Rodinu…,p. 15 . 321 ‘Whom shall we…’, Zhukov, Kakim my ego pomnim,p. 245 . 322 ‘You’ll be sitting…’, Marshal N. N. Voronov, ‘Operation “Ring”

‘, Voenno-istoricheskii zhurnal, 5 & 6, 1962 . 322 ‘Why don’t the Russians…’, Martin Fiebig, 1 Jan. 1943, quoted

in Kempowski (ed.), Das Echolot…, vol. i, p. 24 . 322 ‘German anti-fascists…’, Dyatlenko ms.

. 324 ‘Everyone knew about…’, TsAMO 226/335/7, p. 233 . 324 ‘for all the trousers…’, Dyatlenko ms.

CHAPTER 20

. 333 ‘The misty cloud…’, Dibold, p. 9 . 334 ‘widely strewn…’, Wieder, p. 45 . 334 ‘Young and inexperienced…’, Morzik, p. 188 . 334 ‘Which ass…’, Toepke, p. 69 . 335 ‘My trust in…’, 12 Dec. 1942, Paulus, p. 259, 19 Dec. 1942, p.

260 . 335 ‘in honour of the heroes…’, quoted in Sereny, p. 364 . 335 ‘I hope that you’ll break…’, AMPSB, N677 . 336 ‘very soon…’, BA-MA, N395/13 . 336 ‘who like everybody else…’, Speer, quoted in Sereny, pp. 364–5 . 337 ‘the Russians have…’, Uʃz. Hans Urban, 389th I.D., BA-MA,

RW4/V. 264, p. 89 . 337 ‘eaten two of his…’, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264, p. 93 . 338 ‘I received a quarter litre…’, AMPSB, uncatalogued . 338 ‘We can only count…’, 26 Dec. 1942, AMPSB N677 . 339 ‘The only thing left…’, 27 Dec. 1942, AMPSB N45079A . 339 ‘a light wound…’, Kuber, in Beck, p. 195 . 339 ‘I request permission…’, Strecker, quoted in Haller, p. 104 . 339 ‘steering-wheel heroes’, Beck, p. 158 . 340 ‘One day…’, Plakolb, ÖStA-KA B/1540 . 340 ‘Every half-hour…’, Gefr. Joachim Grunow, Panzer Regt 2,

report, 1 Aug. 1943, BA-MA, RH27-16/43 . 340 ‘Only the…’, Freytag-Loringhoven, conversation, 23 Oct. 1995 . 341 ‘deafening sound’, Hans Schmieder ms.

. 341 ‘could not gain…’, Siegfried Mühler, 44th I.D., ÖStA-KA

B/1582 . 342 ‘I was a soldier…’, Gottfried von Bismarck, ms.

. 342 ‘I was deeply…’, Dohna-Schlobitten, p. 263 . 342 ‘to advise…’, Freytag-Loringhoven, conversation, 23 Oct. 1995 . 343 ‘Give Hitler exactly…’, Behr, conversation, 25 Oct. 1995 . 345 ‘in a coded manner’, letter from Winrich Behr to the author, 26

Feb. 1996 . 347 ‘Discussions about the…’, Manstein, 25 Jan. 1943, BA-MA,

RH19 VI/12 . 348 ‘Taking leave…’, Max Plakolb, ÖStA-KA B/1540 . 348 ‘Scarcely an earthly hope…’, Reuber, 7 Jan. 1943, Bähr and

Bähr, p. 205 . 348 ‘to scribble…’, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264, p. 95 . 348 ‘The mood here…’, 13 Jan. 1943, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264, p. 121 . 348 ‘Perhaps this will…’, 13 Jan. 1943, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264, p.

119 . 348 ‘You are always…’, 13 Jan. 1943, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264, p. 100 . 349 ‘Fate has…’, Gefreiter, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264, p. 96 . 349 ‘fateful battle…’, 13 Jan. 1943, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264, p. 118 . 349 ‘This is a heroic struggle…’, 13 Jan. 1943, BA-MA, RW4/V.

264, p. 99 . 349 ‘we heard in…’, Voronov, p. 18 . 350 376th Infantry Division, Dyatlenko ms., and Voronov, p. 44 . 350 ‘Enemy No. 1 is…’ and ‘My dear parents…’, BA-MA, RW4/v.

264 . 350 Cannibalism, Oberstleutnant a.D. Pfeifer, conversation, 20 Oct.

1995, and anonymous . 350 ‘In a gully…’, Weinert, p. 122 . 351 ‘left him completely…’, Girgensohn, conversation, 22 Apr.

1996

CHAPTER 21

. 352 ‘the usual melody…’, Lt W. M., 15 Dec. 1942, BZG-S . 352 ‘Just a little…’, 10 Jan. 1943, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264, p. 212 . 352 ‘one spoke about death…’, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264 . 352 Ordinary soldiers, Freytag-Loringhoven, conversation, 23 Oct.

1995 . 352 ‘that the relief force…’, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264, p. 63 . 353 ‘Help is close’, interrogation, 16 Jan. 1943, TsAMO 226/335/7,

P.202 . 353 ‘Especially brave were…’, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264 . 353 ‘who conducted themselves…’, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264, p. 61 . 353 ‘an incessant rolling…’, Voronov, p. 27 . 353 ‘There are only two…’, Eugene Dolmatowsky, 27 Jan. 1943,

‘The Ring closes in’, in USSR, Stalingrad,p. 142 . 353 ‘very unpeaceful Sunday’, letter/diary to wife, 10 Jan. 1943,

BA-MA, N395/12 . 354 ‘The enemy munition…’, Zank, p. 60 . 354 ‘Nobody came out’, Siegfried Mühler, ÖStA-KA B/1582 . 354 ‘For an hour…’, Stolberg, report, 17 Feb. 1943, BA-MA,

RW4/v. 264, p. 160 . 354 ‘Some of them…’, Stalingradbund Österreich, August 1989 . 355 ‘From this day on…’, Wallrawe report, BA-MA, RH27-16/43 . 355 ‘If the enemy…’, TsAMO 206/294/18, p. 432 . 355 ‘Those pigs of Romanians…’, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264, p. 61 . 356 ‘Karpovka looks…’, Weinert, p. 34 . 357 ‘instead of digging…’, Strecker, quoted in Haller, p. 104 . 357 ‘resisted bitterly…’, Grams, p. 61 . 357 ‘Munitions coming…’, 13 Jan. 1943, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264 . 357 ‘open ɹre only…’, Wallrawe, BA-MA, RH27-16/43 . 357 ‘soldiers with…’, Klaus, p. 66 . 358 ‘left to their fate’, Wallrawe, BA-MA, RH27-16/43 . 358 ‘Here was the greatest…’, Alois Dorner, ‘Meine Rettung aus

dem Kessel von Stalingrad’, Kameradschaft Stalingrad, Aug./Sept.

1989 . 359 ‘376 Infantry Division…’, 14 Jan. 1943, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264 . 359 ‘Hitler’s excuse…’, Freytag-Loringhoven, conversation, 23 Oct.

1995 . 360 ‘missing presumed dead’, Speer, quoted in Sereny, p. 366 . 360 ‘one look at the actual…’, Morzik, p. 191 . 360 ‘It was senseless to run away’, TsAMO 206/294/47, p. 109 . 361 ‘unbearable conditions…’, interrogation, 2 Feb. 1943, TsAMO

226/335/7, p. 233 . 361 ‘Heavy one-way traɽc…’, BA-MA, RL30/4 . 361 ‘It is severely cold’, Grossman papers, RGALI 1710/1/100 . 362 ‘Several commanders…’, Dr Günther Diez, Schneider-Janessen,

Ρ·145 . 362 ‘Faced with so much…’, Schmieder MS.

. 363 ‘Cases of post-operative…’, Dr Günther Diez, Schneider-

Janessen, Ρ·144 . 363 ‘the so-called hospital’, Freytag-Loringhoven, conversation, 23

Oct. 1995 . 363 ‘It was a form of hell’, Stolberg, report, 17 Feb. 1943, BA-MA,

RW4/v. 264, p. 160 . 363 ‘Death king of Gumrak’, Seydlitz, p. 254 . 364 ‘I am proud…’, Hans Schmieder, ‘Ein Überlebender aus dem

Kessel on Stalingrad berichtet’, Deutsches Soldatenjahrbuch, 1987 . 364 ‘an attack by twenty-eight…’, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264 . 364 ‘I am thinking about…’, letter from unknown German soldier,

AMPSB, quoted in Volgograd University history department

project . 364 ‘Why were no…’, BA-MA, RL30/5 . 364 ‘completely apathetic’, BA-MA, RL30/6 . 365 ‘the Army is no longer…’, BA-MA, RH20-6/796 . 365 ‘fed his dog with…’, Dr Günther Diez, Schneider-Janessen, p.

143 . 365 ‘On the codeword “Lion”…’, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264 . 365 ‘consider ways…’, Freytag-Loringhoven, conversation, 23 Oct.

1995 . 366 ‘trusted and energetic…’, BA-MA, RH19 VI/11, p. 50 . 366 ‘ɻown out of the…’, BA-MA, RW4/V. 264, p. 86 . 366 ‘The Führer decreed…’, Bradley and Schulze-Kossens, p. 42 . 367 ‘seemed absolutely bent…’, Freytag-Loringhoven, conversation,

23 Oct. 1995 . 368 ‘Is it possible…’, BA-MA, RL30/6 . 369 ‘Those in the Fortress…’, 12.48, 18 Jan. 1943, BA-MA, RL30/6 . 369 ‘The Stalingrad Kessel…’, quoted in Boelcke, p. 369 . 369 ‘only an immediate strike’, Waldersee, quoted in Groscurth, p.

95 . 369 ‘who soon will have no…’, Groscurth, p. 553 . 370 ‘There is not a single…’, BA-MA, RL30/6, p. 73 . 370 ‘Gumrak airɹeld…’, BA-MA, RL30/6, p. 80 . 370 ‘Whatever help…’, Maj. Maes, 22 Jan. 1943, BA-MA, RL30/6,

p. 83 . 370 ‘as if on a hare shoot’, and (p. 371) ‘Leave me!’, anonymous

conversation . 371 ‘abandoned cripples’, Weinert, p. 33 . 371 ‘water from snow…’, Böhme, p. 237 . 371 ‘As far as the eye…’, Hans Schmieder MS.

. 372 ‘Herr Major, sie kommen!’ Gebele, in Beck, p. 183 . 372 ‘It was bitterly cold…’, Kuber, in Beck, p. 194 . 372 ‘Surrender out of…’, 22 Jan. 1943, BA-MA, RH19 VI/12, p. 324

CHAPTER 22

. 374 ‘With heavy hearts…’, Kuber, in Beck, p. 196 . 374 red parachutes, Winrich Behr, conversation, 25 Oct. 1995 . 374 ‘German soldiers here’, BA-MA, RH19 VI/12, p. 451 . 375 ‘Exhausted wounded men…’, BA-MA, RW4/v. 264 . 375 ‘Moans, calls for help…’, Dr Hubert Haidinger, in Bund

ehemaliger Stalingradkämpfer, Weihnachts Rundbrief, 1992, p. 9 . 375 ‘Abandon hope…’, Dr Hermann Achleitner, ‘Als Arzt in

Stalingrad’, in Beck, p. 199 . 376 ‘Two Stalingrad women…’, Gebele, in Beck, p. 186 . 377 ‘Where are your regiments?’ Theodor Plievier broadcast, BA-

MA, RW4/v. 264, p. 227 . 377 ‘The eyes of the hardened…’, Chuikov, p. 279 . 378 ‘more interesting’, Dyatlenko MS.

. 378 ‘Kessel-baby’, Dyatlenko MS.; see also ‘Das “Kesselkind” des

Generals’ in Freiheit, 7 Apr. 1965, and BA-MA, N395/12 . 379 ‘the eyes and hand…’, Dyatlenko MS.

. 379 ‘To the Führer!…’, BA-MA, RL30/5 . 380 ‘Paulus is in a…’, 20 Jan. 1943, Groscurth, p. 533 . 380 ‘our own funeral speech’, Wieder, Stalingrad und die

Verantwortung des Soldaten,p. 100 . 380 ‘macabre’, Gottfried von Bismarck MS.

. 380 ‘Turn it up!’ Dr Hubert Haidinger, op. cit., p. 7 . 380 ‘suicide of the Jews’, anonymous conversation . 380 ‘The heroic…’, quoted in Domarus, vol. ii, p. 1979 . 381 ‘I have no intention…’, quoted in Beck, p. 207 . 381 ‘It looks like an invitation…’, Dyatlenko MS.

. 381 ‘What’s going on here?’ Dibold, pp. 24–5 . 382 ‘apocalyptic order’, Seydlitz, p. 250 . 382 ‘We ɹght to the last bullet…’, anonymous conversation . 382 ‘The swastika…’, 30 Jan. 1943 at 19.50 hrs, BA-MA, RL30/5 . 382 ‘listening to the…’, BA-MA, RL30/5 . 382 ‘During that night…’, Schmieder MS.

. 383 ‘Russians at the…’, Sonderstab Milch, BA-MA, RL30/6, p. 83 . 383 ‘In Stalingrad the situation…’, BA-MA, RW4/v. 264 . 383 ‘like the ears…’, Grossman, Life and Fate, p. 801 . 384 ‘Kameraden, Krieg kaputt!’ Fritz Ecker, ‘Ein weiter Weg’, Stalin-

gradbund Österreich, Jan. 1991 . 384 ‘Whoever’s capable…’, Dr Hubert Haidinger, op. cit., p. 8 . 384 ‘Fascist dogs’, Klavdia Sveridovna Ribaltshenko (sic),

interrogation by Gruppe Geheime Feldpolizei 626, 21 July 1943,

BZG-S . 385 ‘Soviet soldiers…’, Beck, p. 189 . 385 ‘What shall we do with…’, anonymous conversation . 387 ‘That’s how Berlin…’, Beck, p. 197 . 387 ‘rather good command of Russian’, C. M. Bogomolov MS.

. 388 ‘A German Field Marshal…’, Lev Bezyminsky, conversation, 10

Nov. 1995 . 388 ‘there is no doubt that…’, Winrich Behr, letter to the author, 26

Feb. 1996 . 390 ‘round and round in circles’, Bezyminsky, conversation, 10

Nov. 1995 . 391 ‘I must inform you…’, Dyatlenko MS.

. 391 ‘They have surrendered…’, 1 Feb. 1943, quoted in Gilbert

(ed.), pp. 17–22; and Warlimont, pp. 319–23 . 392 ‘Troops are ɹghting…’, and ‘I expect…’, BA-MA, RL30/5 . 392 ‘XI Army Corps…’, war diary Sonderstab Milch, BA-MA, RL30/6, p. 151 . 392 ‘When the time comes…’, Strecker, Haller, p. 105 . 393 ‘XI Army Corps…’, BA-MA, RL30/5 . 393 ‘Long live Germany!’ Haller, p. 107 . 393 ‘What the normal…’, Werth, The Year of Stalingrad,p. 463 . 394 1.1 million casualties, of which 485,751, quoted by Erickson,

in Erickson and Dilks, p. 264 . 394 ‘I thought of the…’, Grossman papers, RGALI, 1710/1/101

CHAPTER 23

. 396 ‘No more…’, BA-MA, RL30/6 . 396 ‘the Corporal uneducated…’, Dyatlenko MS.

. 396 ‘We have our own rules’, Bezyminsky, conversation, 10 Nov.

1995 . 397 ‘They looked healthy…’, Werth, The Year of Stalingrad,p. 446 . 397 ‘It was rather like…’, Werth, The Year of Stalingrad,p. 444 . 397 ‘When I opened…’, Bogomolov MS.

. 398 ‘our troops…’, Boelcke, p. 408 . 399 ‘which will move…’, Boelcke, p. 430 . 399 ‘From Führer headquarters…’, Domarus, vol. ii, p. 1985 . 400 ‘The farewell letters…’, 18 Feb. 1943, Heinz Boberach (ed.),

Meldungen aus dem Reich 1938–1945, vol. xii, p. 4822, quoted in

Wette and Ueberschär, p. 63 . 400 ‘in future…’, Boelcke, p. 411 . 400 ‘Stop dancing!’ Leopold Graf von Bismarck, conversation, 4

May 1996 . 402 ‘If we are paid back…’, Bielenberg, p. 135 . 403 ‘We will end the war…’, quoted Rohden, p. 127 . 404 ‘You cannot stop…’, ‘I wonder how it feels…’, Wettlin, pp. 86, 88 . 404 ‘After Stalingrad…’, Smirnov, conversation, 22 Nov. 1995 . 404 ‘needed to believe’, Ehrenburg, pp. 10–11 . 405 ‘They’re starting these gold…’, Ulko, conversation, 21 Nov.

1995

CHAPTER 24

. 406 ‘railway tracks, where…’, Grossman papers, RGALI, 1710/1/101 . 406 ‘Almost all members…’, Beck, p. 191 . 406 ‘dozens each day’, Lt Medvedev to Maj. Demchenko, 9 March

1943, quoted in Epifanov, p. 241 . 407 ‘liberated from fascist…’, RTsKhIDNI 17/8/226 . 407 ‘Most of the children…’, Wettlin, p. 119 . 407 ‘Soviet authorities…’, RTsKhIDNI 17/8/226 . 407 ‘special safe paths’, Goncharov, conversation, 23 Nov. 1995 . 407 ‘Mama, we are all right’, quoted in Agapov, p. 11 . 410 ‘limping and shuʀing…’, Weinert, p. 37 . 411 ‘The Russians had very simple methods…’, anonymous

conversation . 411 ‘We set out with 1,200 men’, Josef Farber, conversation, 16

Apr. 1996 . 412 ‘like herrings…’, Böhme, p. 237 . 412 ‘extremely critical’, TsAMO 62/355/1, p. 226, quoted in

Epifanov, p. 235 . 412 ‘nothing to eat…’, Dr Hubert Haidinger, Bund ehemaliger

Stalingradkämpfer, Weihnachts Rundbrief, 1992, p. 9 . 413 ‘Then came another shock…’, Schmieder MS.

. 413 ‘The dead each…’, Willi Lotz, ‘Die Gefangenlager der

Stalingrader: Erinnerungen an Beketowka’, in Kameradschaft Stalingrad, Aug.–Sept. 1981 . 413 ‘mountain of bodies’, Dr Hubert Haidinger, in Bund ehemaliger

Stalingradkämpfer, Weihnachts Rundbrief, 1992, p. 10 . 413 ‘We had no tears left’, Schmieder MS.

. 413 ‘death register’, Böhme, p. 237 . 413 55,228 prisoners, TsKhIDK, 1e/1/9, p. 34, report by Capt.

Kruglov, quoted in Epifanov, p. 47 . 413 ‘Hunger…’, Dibold, address to Bund ehemaliger

Stalingradkämpfer, 18 Sept. 1976, Limburg . 413 ‘camel-meat’, anonymous conversation . 413 ‘only at gunpoint…’, A. Chuyanov, Na Stremnina Veka, Moscow,

1976, p. 264, quoted in Epifanov, p. 33 . 414 ‘And who are you…’, anonymous conversation .415 ‘It is the duty of a general…’, anonymous conversation . 416 ‘Only be compared to sheep-shearing’, Schmieder MS.

CHAPTER 25

. 418 ‘We pressed to…’, Berezhkov, History in the Making,p. 242 . 418 ‘I propose a salute…’, Berezhkov, op. cit., pp. 289–91 . 420 ‘Doctor, the miracle…’, Dibold, p. 170 . 421 ‘thrusting a long thin shard…’, anonymous conversation . 422 ‘man was just…’, anonymous conversation . 423 ‘According to Seydlitz’s idea…’, 17 Sept. 1943, TsKhIDK,

451p/2/6 . 425 ‘the contemptible…’, quoted Seydlitz, p. 341 . 425 ‘the absence of signiɹcant success’, Melnikov, TsKhIDK,

451p/3/7 . 425 ‘recognize oɽcially’, APRF 3/58/498 . 425 ‘compiled in a devious way’, APRF 3/58/497 .426 ‘members of…’, 25 May 1944, Manuilsky to Shcherbakov, RTsKhIDNI 495/77/37, pp. 32–4 . 427 ‘on Comrade Shcherbakov’s…’, GARF r–9401/2/66 . 427 ‘who could explain the principles…’, 20 Feb. 1945, Krivemko

to Beria, GARF r–9401/2/92/322–4 . 427 ‘It should be mentioned…’, 20 Feb. 1945, Krivemko to Beria,

GARF r–9401/2/92/322–4 . 428 ‘spiritual depression…’, Strecker, quoted in Haller, p. 214 . 428 losses, G. F. Krivosheyev (ed.), Grifsekretnosti sniat’: Poteri

vooruzhennykh sil SSSR v voinakh, boevykh deistviiakh i voennykh

konɻiktakh, Moscow, Voenizdat, 1993, quoted in Erickson, ‘Red

Army battleɹeld performance’, pp. 235–6 . 428 ‘irrespective of their physical…’, quoted in Epifanov, p. 163 . 429 ‘revanchist reactionary general’, RTsKhIDNI 495/77/37 . 430 ‘was valid not only…’, Dibold, p. 186 . 430 ‘suɽcient reason…’, Gottfried von Bismarck MS.

. 431 ‘a very unhappy man’, Behr, conversation, 25 Nov. 1995 . 431 ‘pensioner of the Soviet-occupied zone’, BA-MA, N601/v. 9, p.

8

APPENDIX B

. 439 195,000, Rüdiger Overmans, ‘Das andere Gesicht des Krieges:

Leben und Sterben der 6. Armee’, in Förster (ed.), p. 442 . 439 268,900, Peter Hild, ‘Partnergruppe zur Aufklärung von

Vermisstenschicksalen deutscher und russischer Soldaten des 2.

Weltkrieges’, in Epifanov, p. 29 . 439 ‘Sixth Army ration strength in the Kessel’, BA-MA, RH20-

6/239, p. 226 . 439 ‘only inside the Kessel’, BA-MA, RH20-6/237, p. 129 . 440 111,465, TsKhIDK, is/4/3, p. 16, quoted in Epifanov, p. 25 . 440 Sixth Army losses: 15,000 to 6 December, then 36,859 between 6 December and 7 January, BA-MA, N601/v. 5

OceanofPDF.com Select Bibliography

Achleitner, Dr Hermann, ‘Als Arzt in Stalingrad’, in Beck (ed.) Adam, Wilhelm, Stalingrad Mahnt, Berlin, 1951 ———, Der schwere Entschluss, Berlin, 1965 Addison, Paul, and Calder, Angus (eds.), Time to Kill, The Soldier’s

Experience of War 1939– 1945, London, 1997 Agapov, Boris, After the Battle, Moscow, 1943 Andrew, Christopher, and Gordievsky, Oleg, KGB, The Inside Story,

London, 1990 Andreyev, Catherine, Vlasov and the Russian Liberation Movement,

Cambridge (UK), 1987 Axworthy, Mark, Third Axis, Fourth Army, London, 1995

ähr, W., and Bähr, H. W. (eds.), Kriegsbriefe gefallener Studenten 1939–1945, Tübingen, 1952 artov, Omer, The Eastern Front, 1941–1945, German Troops and the

Barbarisation of Warfare, London, 1985 ———, Hitler’s Army: Soldiers, Nazis and War in the Third Reich,

Oxford, 1991 eck, Alois (ed.), Bis Stalingrad, U lm, 1983 elow, Nicolaus von, AlsHitlers Adjutant 1937–1945, Mainz, 1980 erezhkov, Valentin M., In diplomatischer Mission bei Hitler in Berlin

1940–1941, Frankfurt am Main, 1967 ———, History in the Making, Moscow, 1982 ———, Ich war Stalins Dolmetscher: Hinter den Kulissen der politischen

Weltbühne, Munich, 1991 eyer, W. R., Stalingrad. Unten, wo das Leben konkret war, Frankfurt am

Main, 1987 ialer, Seweryn, Stalin and His Generals: Soviet Military Commanders’ Memoirs of World War II, Boulder, Colo., 1984 lank, Alexander, Die deutschen Kriegsgefangenen in der UdSSR,

Cologne, 1979 oddenberg, W., Die Kriegsgefangenpost Deutscher Soldaten in

Sowjetischem Gewahrsam und die Post von ihren Angehörigen

während des II. Weltkrieges, Berlin, 1985, MS. MGFA-P oelcke, W. A. (ed.), ‘Wollt Ihr den Totalen Krieg?’ Die Geheime

Goebbels-Konferenzen, Stuttgart, 1967 öhme, K. W., Die deutschen Kriegsgefangenen in sowjetischer Hand,

Munich, 1966 radley, Dermot, and Schulze-Kossens, Richard (eds.), Tätigkeitsbericht

der Chefs des Heerespersonalamtes General der Infanterie Rufolf

Schmundt, Osna-brück, 1984 ullock, Alan, Hitler and Stalin, Parallel Lives, London, 1991 Carell, Paul (P. K. Schmidt), Hitler’s War on Russia, London, 1964 Cassidy, H. C., Moscow Dateline, Boston, Mass., 1943 Chaney, Otto Preston, Zhukov, Oklahoma City, Okla., 1972 Chuikov, Vasili Ivanovich, The Beginning of the Road: The Battle for

Stalingrad, London, 1963 Clark, Alan, Barbarossa: The Russian-German Conɻict 1941–1945,

London, 1996 Craig, William, Enemy at the Gates: The Battle for Stalingrad, New York,

1973 Dallin, Alexander, German Rule in Russia 1941–1945, London, 1981 Deist, Wilhelm (ed.), The German Military in the Age of Total War,

Leamington Spa, War. (UK), 1985 Dettmer, Friedrich, Die 44. Infanterie-Division, Friedberg, 1979 Dibold, Hans, Arzt in Stalingrad. Passion einer Gefangenschaft, Salzburg,

1949 Dieckhoʃ, Gerhard, and Holzmann, M., 3. Infanterie-Division, Friedberg, 1978 Doerr, Hans, Der Feldzug nach Stalingrad, Darmstadt, 1955 Dohna-Schlobitten, Alexander Fürst zu, Erinnerungen eines alten

Ostpreussen, Berlin, 1989 Domarus, M., Hitler, Reden und Proklamationen, 1932–1945, Würzburg,

1962 Druzhinin, B. V., Two Hundred Days of Fire, Moscow, 1970 Dunn, Walter S., Hitler’s Nemesis: The Red Army, Westport, Conn., 1994 bert, Jens, Zwischen Mythos und Wirklichkeit. Die Schlacht um

Stalingrad in deutsch-sprachigen authentischen und literarischen

Texten, Berlin, vols. i & ii, 1989 MS. MGFA-P ———, Stalingrad – eine Deutsche Legende, Reinbek bei Hamburg, 1992 hrenburg, Ilya, Men, Years – Life: The War 1941–1945, London, 1964 insiedel, Heinrich Graf von, Tagebuch der Versuchung, Berlin, 1950 ———, The Shadow of Stalingrad, London, 1953 ———, Der Überfall, Hamburg, 1984 pifanov, A. E., Die Tragödie der deutschen Kreigsgefangenen in

Stalingrad, Osnabrück, 1996 rickson, John, The Road to Stalingrad, London, 1975 (Stalin’s War

with Germany, vol. 1) ———, The Road to Berlin, London, 1983 (Stalin’s War with Germany,

vol. 2) ———, ‘The development of Soviet military doctrine’, The Origins of

Contemporary Doctrine Conference, Larkhill, 28 March 1996 ———, ‘Red Army battleɹeld performance, 1941–1945: The system

and the soldier’, in Addison and Calder (eds.)

rickson, John, and Dilks, David (eds.), Barbarossa, the Axis and the

Allies, Edinburgh, 1994

est, Joachim, Hitler, vol. ii, Frankfurt am Main, Ullstein, 1976 ———, Staatsstreich: Der lange Weg zum 20. Juli, Berlin, 1994 örster, Jürgen, Stalingrad, Risse im Bündnis 1942/43, Freiburg, 1975 ———, ‘Das Unternehmen “Barbarossa” als Eroberungs– und

Vernicht-ungskrieg’, in Das deutsche Reich und der Zweite

Weltkrieg, vol. iv, Stuttgart, 1983 ———, ‘Evolution and development of German doctrine, 1914–1945’,

The Origins of Contemporary Doctrine Conference, Larkhill, 28 March

1996 ed.), Stalingrad: Ereignis, Wirkung, Symbol, Munich, 1992

Garrard, C, and Garrard, J. (eds.), World War II and the Soviet People, New York, 1993 Gilbert, Felix (ed.), Hitler Directs His War: The Secret Records of His

Daily Military Conferences, New York, 1951 Giulini, Udo, Stalingrad und mein zweites Leben, Neustadt/Weinstrasse,

1978 Glantz, David, Soviet Military Deception in the Second World War,

London, 1989 ———, The Role of Intelligence in Soviet Military Strategy in World

War II, Novato, Calif., 1990 Glantz, David, and House, J. M., When Titans Clashed, Kansas City,

1995 Goellecke, Pontianus van, Der Weg ins Leere, Wolfenbüttel, 1974 Goldhagen, Daniel, Hitler’s Willing Executioners: Ordinary Germans and

the Holocaust, London, 1997 Golovchanski, A., ‘Ich will raus aus diesem Wahnsinn.’ Deutsche Briefe

von der Ostfront, Wuppertal, 1991 Götte, Franz, and Peiler, H., Die 29. Infanterie-Division, Friedberg, 1984 Grams, Rolf, Die 14. Panzer-Division, 1940–1945, Bad Nauheim, 1957 Groscurth, Helmuth, Tagebücher eines Abwehroɽziers, Stuttgart, 1970 Guderian, Gen. Heinz, Panzer Leader, London, 1952

Halder, Col.–Gen. Franz, Kriegstagebuch, vol. iii, Stuttgart, 1964 Haller, U. (ed.), Lieutenant General Karl Strecker, Westport, Conn., 1994 Harrison, Mark, Soviet Planning in Peace and War, 1938–1945,

Cambridge (UK), 1985 Hassell, Ulrich von, The von Hassell Diaries, London, 1948 Hauck, Friedrich, Eine deutsche Division in Russland: 3 05.

Infanteriedivision, Friedberg, 1975 Heer, Hannes (ed.), Vernichtungskrieg. Verbrechen der Wehrmacht 1941

bis 1944, Ausstellungskatalog, Hamburg, 1996 Heiber, H. (ed.), Lagebesprechungen im Führerhauptquartier.

Protokollfragmente aus Hitlers militärischen Konferenzen 1942–

1945, Munich, 1962 Himpe, Ullus, Die 71. Infanterie-Division in Zweiten Weltkrieg,

Neckargemünd, 1973 Hoʃmann, Kurt, Beiträge zur Geschichte der 60. Infanterie-Division

(mot.), MS. MGFA-P, 1979 Holl, Adalbert, Was geschah nach Stalingrad? Duisburg, 1964 Hoth, Hermann, Panzer Operationen, Heidelberg, 1956

acobsen, Hans-Adolf (ed.), Generaloberst Halder: Kriegstagebuch, 3 vols., Stuttgart, 1963 acobsen, Hans-Adolf, and Rohwer, J. (eds.), Decisive Battles of World

War II: The German View, London, 1965 ukes, Geoʃrey, Hitler’s Stalingrad Decisions, Berkeley, Calif., 1985 Kageneck, August von, Examen de conscience, Paris, 1996 Kehrig, Manfred, Stalingrad: Analyse und Dokumentation einer Schlacht,

Stuttgart, 1974 Keitel, Wilhelm, The Memoirs of Field Marshal Keitel, New York, 1966 Kemmerich, P., Im Vorfeld von Stalingrad. Tagebuchblätter, Munich,

1964 Kempowski, Walter (ed.), Das Echolot. Eine kollektives Tagebuch Januar

und Februar 1943, Munich, 1993 Kerr, Walter, The Secret of Stalingrad, London, 1979 Klaus, Edgar, Durch die Hölle des Krieges, Erinnerungen eines deutschen Unternehmers an Stalingrad, Berlin, 1991 Klee, E., and Dressen, W. (eds.), Gott Mit Uns, Der deutsche

Vernichtungskrieg im Osten, Frankfurt am Main, 1992 Klee, Ernst; Dressen, Willi; and Riess, Volker (eds.), Schöne Zeiten:

Judenmord aus der Sicht der Täter und Gaʃer, Frankfurt am Main,

1988 Kluge, Alexander, Schlachtsbeschreibung, Freiburg, 1964 Konsalik, Heinz (ed.), Stalingrad, Porträt einer Stadt, Inferno einer

Schlacht, Protokoll eines Wahnsinns, Bayreuth, 1968 Korfes, Dr Otto, Zur Geschichte von Stalingrad, 1942–1943, MGFA-P,

undated MS.

Knight, Amy, Beria, Stalin’s First Lieutenant, Princeton, NJ, 1993 Kruse, Martin (ed.), Die Stalingrad-Madonna, das Werk Kurt Reubers als

Dokument der Versöhnung, Hanover, 1993 Krylov, Nikolai, Stalingrad. Die entscheidende Schlacht des zweiten

Weltkrieges, Cologne, 1981 Kurowski, Franz, Lüftbrucke Stalingrad: die Tragödie der Luftwaʃe und

der 6. Armee, Voninckel, 1983 angsdorʃ, Gero von, ‘Jagdɻieger in Stalingrad: Aus den

Aufzeichnungen des Oberleutnant Kurt Ebener’, Deutsches

Soldatenjahrbuch, 1973, pp. 193–202 enz, Friedrich, Stalingrad – der verlorene Sieg, Heidelberg, 1956 öser, Jochen, Bittere Pɻicht. Kampf und Untergang der 76. Berlin-

Branden-burgischen Infanterie-Division, Osnabrück, 1988 ucke, Christian von, Panzer-Regiment 2, Kleve, 1953

Malaparte, Curzio, The Volga Rises in Europe, London, 1958 Manstein, FM Erich von, Lost Victories, London, 1959 Aus einen Soldatenleben, Bonn, 1985 Messenger, Charles, The Last Prussian, London, 1991 Messerschmidt, Manfred, Was damais Recht war – NS-Militar und Strafjustiz im Vernichtungskrieg, Essen, 1996 Metelmann, H., Through Hell for Hitler, London, 1990 Michalka, W. (ed.), Der Zweite Weltkrieg, Munich, 1989 Michel, Karl, Es begann am Don, Bern, 1946 Morzik, D. F., German Air Force Airlift Operations, New York, 1961 Mösch, Gerhard, Stalingrad. Ein Erlebnis und seine Konsequenzen, Kassel,

1946 Neidhardt, Hanns, Mit Tanne und Eichenlaub, Kriegschronik der 100.

Jäger Division, Graz, 1981 Noakes, Jeremy, and Pridham, Geoʃrey (eds.), Nazism 1919–1945, 3

vols., Exeter, Devon (UK), 1988

abst, Helmut, The Outermost Frontier, London, 1957 aget, R. T., Manstein, His Campaigns and His Trail, London, 1951 aulus, Friedrich, Ich stehe hier auf Befehl, Frankfurt am Main, 1960 hilippi, Alfred, and Heim, Ferdinand, Der Feldzug gegen Sowjetrussland

1941–1945, Stuttgart, 1962 iekalkiewicz, Janusz, Stalingrad, Anatomie einer Schlacht, Munich,

1977 iocher, Hermann, The German Air Force versus Russia, 1942, New

York, 1966 lotnikov, Col. Y. V., Die Stalingrader Schlacht, Moscow, 1982 odewils, Clemens, Don und Volga, Munich, 1952

Reinhardt, Dr Klaus, Moscow: The Turning Point, New York, 1992 Riedesser, Peter, Maschinengewehre hinter der Front, Frankfurt am

Main, 1996 Robel, Gert, Die deutschen Kriegsgefangenen in der Sowjetunion, Munich,

1974 Rohden, Hans-Detlef Herhudt von, Die Luftwaʃe ringt um Stalingrad,

Wiesbaden, 1950 Rokossovsky, K. K., A Soldier’s Duty, Moscow, 1970 Rotundo, Louis (ed.), Battle for Stalingrad. The 1943 Soviet General Staʃ

Study, New York, 1989 adaranda, Dana, Beyond Stalingrad: Manstein and the Operations of Army Group Don, New York, 1990 amsonov, A. M. (ed.), Stalingradskaia bitva, Moscow, 1968 app, Franz, Gefangen in Stalingrad, Steyr, 1992 cheibert, Horst, Nach Stalingrad – 48 Kilometer, Heidelberg, 1956 chimak, Anton, Lamprecht, Karl and Dettmer, Friedrich, Die 44

Infanterie-Division, Vienna, 1969 chmidt, Paul, Hitler’s Interpreter, The Secret History of German

Diplomacy 1935–1945, London, 1951 chneider-Janessen, Karlheinz, Arzt im Krieg, Frankfurt am Main, 1993 chramm, P. E., and Hillgruber, A. (eds.), Kriegstagebuch des OKW der

Wehrmacht, Frankfurt am Main, 1963 chröter, Heinz, Stalingrad… bis zur lezte Ρ atrone, Lengerich, 1953 chulte, Theo J., The German Army and Nazi Policies in Occupied Russia,

Oxford, 1989 ella, A., The Value of Human Life in Soviet Warfare, London, 1992 elle, Η., Die Tragödie von Stalingrad, Hanover, 1948 ereny, Gitta, Albert Speer: His Battle With Truth, London, 1995 eth, Ronald, Stalingrad: Point of Return, London, 1959 evryuk, Vladimir, Moscow-Stalingrad, Moscow, 1970 eydlitz, Gen. Walther von, Stalingrad, Konɻikt und Konsequenz,

Erinnerungen, Oldenburg, 1977 hindel’, Aleksandr Danilovich (ed.), Po obe storoni fronta, Moscow,

1995 htemenko, S. M., The Soviet General Staʃ at War, Moscow, 1970 hukman, H., Stalin’s Generals, London, 1993 imonov, Konstantin Mikhailovich, Stalingrad Fights On, Moscow, 1942 ———, Raznye dni voiny, Dnevnik pisatelia, vol. ii, Moscow, 1978 ommerfeldt, Martin, Das Oberkommando der Wehrmacht gibt bekannt,

Frankfurt am Main, 1952 tahlberg, Alexander, Bounden Duty, London, 1990 teidle, Luitpold, Entscheidung an der Wolga, Berlin, 1970 trassner, Peter, Verräter: Das Nationalkomitee Freies Deutschland, Munich, 1963 tratowa, Wulf, Kein Friede in Stalingrad: Feldpostbriefe 1941/1942,

Vienna, 1995 treit, Christian, Keine Kameraden: Die Wehrmacht und die sowjetischen

Kriegsgefangenen, Stuttgart, 1991 Toepke, Gunter, Stalingrad, Wie es wirklich war, Stade, 1949 Tuyll, H. Van, Feeding the Bear: American Aid to the Soviet Union 1941–

1945, New York, 1989 Uberberschär, Gerd, and Wette, Wolfram (eds.), ‘Unternehmen

Barbarossa’, der deutsche Überfall auf die Sowjetunion 1941,

Frankfurt am Main, 1993 USSR, Stalingrad, an Eye Witness Account, London, 1943 Vasilevsky, A. M., A Lifelong Cause, Moscow, 1978 Van Creveld, Martin, Hitler’s Strategy, the Balkan Clue, Cambridge,

1973 ———, Fighting Power: German and US Army Performance 1939–1945,

London, 1983 Vogel, Detlef, and Wette, Wolfram, Andere Helme – Andere Menschen?

Essen, 1995 Volkogonov, Dimitri, Stalin: Triumph and Tragedy, London, 1991 Voronov, N. N., ‘Operation “Ring”, Voenno-istoricheski zhurnal, 5 & 6,

1962 Voss, Paul-Hans, Freigegeben, Tagebuch Aufzeichnungen eines Funkers,

Rossdorf, 1982

Waasen, Heinrich Maria, Was geschah in Stalingrad? Zell am See, Salzburg, 1950 Warlimont, Walter, Im Hauptquartier der deutschen Wehrmacht 1939–

1945, Frankfurt am Main, 1962 Wegner, Bernd, ‘German perceptions of Soviet military and economic strength in preparation for Operation Blau’, in C. Andrew and J. Noakes, Intelligence and International Relations 1900–1945, Exeter, Devon (UK), 1987 ———, ‘Der Krieg Gegen die Sowjetunion 1942/3’, in

Militärgeschichtliches Forschungsamt, Das deutsche Reich und der

Zweite Weltkrieg, vol. vi, Stuttgart, 1990 Weinert, Erich, Stalingrad Diary, London, 1944 Werth, Alexander, The Year of Stalingrad, London, 1946 ———, Russia at War 1941–1945, London, 1964 Werthen, Wolfgang, Geschichte der 16. Panzerdivision, Bad Nauheim,

1958 Wette, Wolfram, and Ueberschär, Gerd (eds.), Mythos und Wirklichkeit

einer Schlacht, Frankfurt am Main, 1993 Wettlin, Margaret, Russian Road, London, 1945 Wich, Rudolph, Baden– Württembergische Divisionen im 2. Weltkrieg,

Karlsruhe, 1957 Wieder, Joachim, Tragödie von Stalingrad, Erinnerungen

einesÜberlebenden, Deggendorf, 1955 ———, Stalingrad und die Verantwortung des Soldaten, Munich, 1962 Yeremenko, A. I., Tage der Entscheidung. Als Frontoberbefehlshaber in der

Schlacht an der Wolga, Berlin, 1964

ank, Horst, Stalingrad, Kessel und Gefangenschaft, Herford, 1993 ayas, Alfred M. de, The Wehrmacht War Crimes Bureau, 1939–1945, Lincoln, Neb., 1989 hilin, Lt-Gen. P. A., They Sealed Their Own Doom, Moscow, 1970 hukov, Georgi K., Marshal Zhukov’s Greatest Battles, New York, 1969 ———, Kakim my ego pomnim, Moscow, 1988

PERIODICALS, NEWSPAPERS, JOURNALS AND VETERANS’ PUBLICATIONS Bund ehemaliger Stalingradkämpfer, Weihnachts Rundbrief Bundestreʃen der Stalingradkämpfer Deutsches Soldatenjahrbuch storicheskii Arkhiv Kameradschaft Stalingrad: Mitteilungsblatt für die ehemaligen

Stalingradkämpfer und denÖsterreichischen Stalingradbund Opolchentsy ν boyakh za Rodinu. Boevoi put’ divizii Narodnogo

opolchenya Kievskogo raiona g. Moskvy, Moscow, 1981 talingradbundÖsterreich talinskoe znamia Voenno-istoricheskii zhurnal Völkischer Beobachter

FICTION AND OTHER LITERARY WORKS

Anon., Last Letters from Stalingrad, London, 1956*  ondarev, Yuri, Heisser Schnee, Berlin, 1972 redel, Willi, Der Sonderführer, Berlin, 1970 Grossman, Vasily, The People Immortal, London, 1943 ———, Stalingrad, Moscow, 1946 ———, Life and Fate, London, 1985 Konsalik, Heinz, Der Arzt von Stalingrad, Munich, 1956 azarev, L. (ed.), Let the Living Remember, Moscow, 1976 Nekrassov, Viktor Platonovich, Front Line Stalingrad, London, 1962 Neruda, Pablo, ‘Canto a Stalingrado’ and Nuevo Canto de Amor a Stalin-grado’, in Tercera Residencia 1935–1945, Barcelona, 1977 lievier, Theodor, Stalingrad, Berlin, 1946 imonov, Konstantin M., Days and Nights, New York, 1945

OceanofPDF.com Index

Page numbers in italics refer to the maps.

Abakumov, Viktor, 80, 389n Abganerovo, 243, 264 Abramov, Κ. K., 90 Adam, Colonel Wilhelm, 119, 376, 379, 383, 387, 397, 429, 431 Akhmatova, Anna, 125 Aleksandrov, G. F., 234 Angern, General, 366 Antonescu, Marshal Ion, 20, 87, 229, 250, 272 Arnim, General Jürgen Sixt von, 397, 423 Astrakhan, 2, 81, 100, 226 Austrian troops, 65, 181, 185, 234, 244, 279, 319, 356, 358–9,397. 413

Babi–Yar (massacre of Jews), 15, 56 Badanov, General Vasily, 300–301, 313 Barrikady weapons factory, 161, 187f, 192, 198, 205ʃ, 216 Barvenkovo, 64ʃ Batyuk, Colonel Nikolay, 142–3, 203, 216 Beck, Dr Alois, 18, 309 Beck, General Ludwig, 16, 146, 184, 369 Behr, Captain Winrich, 227, 240, 271,342–7, 359, 383 Bekabad prison camp, 415f Beketovka, 98, 110, 147, 243, 248, 250, 407; prison compounds, 371, 406, 411, 412–14, 415 Below, Major Nicolaus von, 124, 344 Berezhkov, Valentin, 3, 4, 6–8,418 Beria, Lavrenty, 4, 18, 35, 36–7, 44, 86, 132, 225, 234, 385–7, 404, 422f, 436 Berghof, Berchtesgaden, 266, 270 Bezyminsky, Captain Lev, 387f, 396 Bock, Field Marshal Fedor von, 20, 29, 33, 35, 39f, 42, 62, 65, 69, 74, 78 Bormann, Martin, 16, 335 Bielenberg, Christabel, 402 Bismarck, Lieutenant Gottfried von, 341–2, 380, 429f Bismarck, Prince Otto von, (Chancellor), 5 Bismarck, Prince Otto von, (diplomat), 400 Blobel, Standartenführer SS Paul, 55–6 Brauchitsch, Field Marshal Walther von, 14, 20, 47 Bredel, Willi, 307, 327, 329–30 Brest-Litovsk, 21, 26 Budenny, Marshal Semyon, 29, 34 Butkov, General V. V., 246

Chir, river, 64, 90, 242 Chuikov, General Vasily, 89–90, 127–9, 130–32, 141, 144, 149, 151–2, 162, 166, 188, 192, 196, 206f, 214, 302–3, 377, 422, 431 Churchill, Winston, 5, 29, 402, 418 Commissar Order, 14, 16, 54f Commissars in Red Army, 24, 89, 93, 115, 136–7, 153, 167, 168–70, 172, 193, 201–2, 289 Cossacks, 88, 102, 178, 184–5, 274 Croatian 369th Inf. Regt, 183, 281,413

Daniels, General Edler von, 258, 283, 311–12, 317, 319, 336, 350, 353, 378, 423 Deboi, General, 319, 397 Dekanozov, Vladimir, 4, 5, 6–8,418 Demyansk, 43, 63 Dibold, Dr Hans, 333, 409, 413, 420, 429 Dietrich, General Sepp, 52 Dohna-Schlobitten, Prince A. zu, 17f, 261, 264, 342, 367 Don, river, 2, 51, 64, 74f, 78, 84, 89, 129, 226, 230, 247; ɹghting in Don bend, 90–96; ɹrst crossing, 102–3; German retreat across, 258–62, 269 Drebber, General Moritz von, 376, 426 Dumitrescu, General Petre, 229 Dyatlenko, Major Nikolay, 180, 322–30, 360, 378f, 388–91, 396

Ehrenburg, Ilya, 86, 125, 404 Einsiedl, Count Heinrich von, 286 Eismann, Major, 299, 309

Feldgendarmerie, 55, 177, 179, 254, 259, 341,343, 358, 365, 367, 384, 428 Feldpost and Luftpost, 260, 348–9 Fiebig, General Martin, 267, 300f, 322, 333, 335, 360, 364 Freytag-Loringhoven, Captain Baron von, 66, 107, 124, 256, 365, 367 Frolovo, 64; camp, 421 Gablenz, General Baron Eccard von, 234 Gebele, Major Bruno, 248f, 371f Gehlen, Colonel Reinhard, 222, 228 German armies: First Panzer, 22, 29, 51, 64, 65, 69ʃ, 79, 293, 347 Second Panzer, 33 Fourth Panzer, 21,64, 72, 77, 79, 95–6, 100, 108, 113, 117f, 226, 248, 255, 336, 398 Second, 72 Sixth, 16, 22, 35, 55, 61, 64, 65, 70f, 76f; advance to Stalingrad, 87, 102–8, 118, 129; ɹghting in Stalingrad, 146–7, 151, 187, 191–2; and Uranus, 220, 226, 228, 235, 239–240, 244, 247, 250, 252, 253–4, 268; in Kessel, 269, 270–71, 275, 280, 282, 293, 297, 299, 302, 317; and Christmas, 311–15; ignorance of German public, 335–6; rumours, 336–7, 352; ɹnal battle, 354–7, 364, 372; ‘Noah’s Ark’, 366–7; surrender, 383f, 393; and German propaganda, 398–401 Eleventh, 17, 55, 61, 70, 81 Seventeenth, 70, 79, 293, 347 German divisions: Grossdeutschland, 81, 352 1st Pz., 36 3rd Pz., 53, 75 6th Pz., 296, 298f, 301–2 9th Pz., 58 10th Pz., 36 14th Pz., 70, 114, 130, 163, 181, 189, 191, 193f, 218, 231, 246, 251,261,357, 376 16th Pz., 17, 66, 89, 94, 96, 102–4, 106–8, 124, 163, 167, 190, 245, 247, 254, 258, 262, 278, 283, 313,315, 359 17th Pz., 297f, 300 18th Pz., 40 22nd Pz., 60, 79, 186, 231, 240, 245, 252 23rd Pz., 71, 296 24th Pz, 13, 96, 114, 130, 138, 149, 161, 163, 181, 218, 245, 247, 377 3rd Mot. Inf., 354f, 359 29th Mot. Inf., 87, 114, 125, 135, 232, 306, 354, 359 60th Mot. Inf., 16, 18, 162f, 189–90, 209, 271, 313,315, 359, 375 44th Inf., 65, 90, 244, 262, 279, 282, 314, 319, 333, 354, 358 71st Inf., 129ʃ, 184, 216, 377f 76th Inf., 97, 113, 128f, 131, 184, 192, 259, 341, 370 79th Inf., 167, 211, 216 94th Inf., 130, 140, 163, 189, 192, 211, 271 96th Inf., 60 100thJäger Div., 161 ʃ 188, 216, 359, 366 113th Inf., 208, 291, 305 295th Inf., 53, 129, 131, 137, 163, 175, 216, 360 297th Inf., 18, 62, 65, 70, 208, 248, 283, 311, 353, 359, 366, 371,370, 385, 387 305th

Inf., 13, 119, 183, 192,193,206,216,324, 361,385,412 371st Inf., 57, 96–7, 209, 248, 353, 365, 377 376th Inf., 208, 251, 258, 279f, 282ʃ, 350, 354, 359 384th Inf., 57, 88, 92, 100, 234, 282 389th Inf., 66, 97, 112, 130, 161ʃ, 164, 192, 195, 216, 271, 316 Girgensohn, Dr Hans, 304–6, 351 Goebbels, Joseph, 5, 146, 180, 197–8, 313, 369, 372, 378, 380, 398ʃ, 401ʃ Goering, Hermann, 16, 270, 273, 275, 280, 292, 335, 360, 369, 378, 380, 401–2, 403 Golikov, General F. I., 72, 189 Golubinsky, 146, 239, 242, 253f, 267 Gordov, General V. N., 99 Gorishny, Colonel V. A., 196 Gromky, 242, 244 Groscurth, Colonel Helmuth, 16, 55–6, 87, 145–6, 184, 187, 209, 212, 269, 273, 290, 369,

380, 393, 421 Grossman, Vasily, 107, 137, 148, 152, 159, 174, 204–5, 214, 263, 286, 316, 361, 383, 394 Grozny, 2, 69–70 Guderian, General Heinz, 21, 24, 26, 29, 32f, 39, 403 Gumrak, 126, 106, 254, 267, 269, 304, 315,346, 350, 36of, 363, 364, 370–71, 374f Gurov, Kuzma, 128 Gurtiev, Colonel L. N., 187–8

Halder, General Franz, 16, 20, 26, 29,31,53, 62f, 65, 78, 80, 123, 129, 145–6, 223 Hartmann, General Alexander von, 377, 381 Hassell, Ulrich von, 16 Heim, General Ferdinand, 62, 231, 244f, 266, 272 Heitz, General Walther, 65, 147, 382, 398 Hess, Rudolf, 3, 5 Himmler, Heinrich, 55, 273, 425 Hindenburg, President von, 274 Hitler, Adolf, 4, 7f, 14, 18; and Barbarossa, 20; and Red Army, 23–4; 32, 39, 42ʃ, 47, 51f; and generals, 58, 67–8, 71–2, 74, 78, 145, 228–9, 266, 290, 316, 320, 342; and Operation Blue, 77–8, 80–81, 95–6; and Caucasus, 123–4; and Stalingrad, 164–5, 187, 191, 218, 251–2; orders for winter, 209; Bürgerbraukeller speech, 213–14; and Uranus, 223, 231, 247, 253f, 266; and encirclement, 269–73, 297–8, 309–10, 316, 318, 333, 347; and Behr, 342–7; and ɹnal resistance, 359–60, 372–3, 379f; and surrender, 391–2; after surrender, 401, 403–4 ‘Hiwi’ auxiliaries, 180, 184–6, 208, 210, 247, 274, 281n, 282, 319, 351, 353, 355, 365,

384–5 Hooven, Colonel G. van, 424, 426 Hoth, General Hermann, 16,21,33, 39, 69, 72, 95, 100, 113f, 130, 226; and Uranus, 232, 249f, 267; and Winter Storm, 296, 299, 301,337 Hube, General Hans, 94f, 102–3, 11O, 112f, 114–15, 147, 261, 269, 315–16, 342, 366,

368, 374, 377, 379 Hungarian Second Army, 20,51,72, 77,81–3, 181–2, 322 Ilimen camp, 421, 429

Italian Eighth Army, 81, 182–3, 293, 300

Jaenecke, General, 147, 195, 364 Jeschonnek, General Hans, 270, 280, 292, 335, 39 Jews, actions against, 14–17, 54, 55–6, 79 Jodl, General Alfred, 123, 145, 270, 391 Jurisdiction Order, 14, 16, 54, 57–8, 60

Kageneck, August Count von, 58–9 Kageneck, Clemens Count von, 75 Kalach, 96, 115, 226, 253, 254–6, 269, 295, 325, 352 Kalinin, 36, 41 Kamyshin, 134, 226 Karpovka, 319, 321,346, 355ʃ Kazakov, Major-General Vasily, 387 Keitel, Field Marshal Wilhelm, 14, 145, 270, 344, 391 Kesselring, Field Marshal Albert, 34 Kharkov, 2, 57, 61f, 63–5, 70, 73, 75, 296, 341, 345 Khrushchev, Nikita, 29, 66, 99, 108–9, 125–6, 138, 162, 167, 196, 230, 430 Kiev, 6, 15; encirclement battle of, 29 Kirchner, General Friedrich, 296 Kirponos, General Mikhail, 22 Klamroth, Lieutenant-Colonel Bernhard, 345–6 Kleist, General Ewald von, 22, 51, 65, 69, 425 Kletskaya, 225, 226, 230, 239, 241,242, 244, 246 Kluge, Field Marshal Hans Günter von, 39, 41, 273–4, 298, 424 Komsomol (Communist Youth), 10, 98, 109, 167, 212 Korfes, General Otto, 137, 382, 423ʃ, 429 Kosygin, Aleksey, 37 Kotelnikovo, 64, 293, 296f Kotluban, 106n, 323 Krasnaya Sloboda, 126, 127, 134 Krasnoarmeysk camp, 417 Krasnogorsk camp, 415, 422 Kravchenko, General, 244, 246, 251, 253 Krylov, General Nikolay, 128 Kunowski, Lieutenant-Colonel Werner von, 334 Kursk, 52, 72 Kuybyshev, 2, 36f Kuznetsov, Admiral Nikolay, 9f, 133

Lascar, General Mihail, 253, Lattmann, General Martin, 393, 423f, 429 League of German Oɽcers, 422f, 426 Leeb, Field Marshal Ritter von, 20 Lend-Lease, 110, 124, 225 Leningrad, 6, 20, 28, 32–3, 37, 42, 63, 100 Lenski, General Arno von, 393, 429 Leyser, General, 250–51 List, Field Marshal Wilhelm, 78, 123, 145 Luchinsky, 102, 243, 262 Luftwaʃe: and National Socialism, 18f, 41, 267; and Stalingrad air-bridge, 270, 275, 280–81, 291–2, 300–301, 333–5, 344; evacuation of wounded, 340–41; air-drops, 374; losses, 398 Formations: Second Air Fleet, 34 Fourth Air Fleet, 103–5, 192 VIII Air Corps, 69, 115 –16, 138–9, 216, 230, 267, 322, 333–4, 374 9th Flak Division, 18, 254, 268, 280, 341, 364, 370 Lunovo camp, 415, 423 Lvov, 22–3 Lyudnikov, Colonel I. I., 196, 216

Mäder, Lieutenant-Colonel, 353, 355, 359, 365f Maikop, 2, 69–70 Malinin, General M. S., 323, 388 Malinovsky, General Rodion, 106, 298, 309 Malenkov, Georgy, 9, 37, 133, 234 Manstein, Field Marshal E. von, 16–17, 22, 55, 61, 70, 75, 81, 254, 266, 268, 273–4, 296, 298f, 302,308–10, 315f, 341–2, 343, 347, 368, 403, 425, 430 Manuilsky, Dmitry, 197, 422, 425–6 Marinovka, 346, 354, 356 Melnikov, General, 422f, 425 Milch, Field Marshal Erhard, 345; and ‘Special Staʃ’, 359, 368–9, 370, 383, 396, 398, 403 Millerovo, 78, 295 Molotov, Vyacheslav, 5, 9f, 37f, 234, 417 Morozovsk, 64, 78, 114, 179 Moscow, 5–6, 9, 72; advance on, 32f, 34, 36; state of siege, 38 Myshkova, river, 295, 299, 301, 309, 311, 314, 320

NKGB see NKVD (security police) NKVD, 19, 22, 28, 36–7, 157, 419; propaganda and POW Department, 86, 180, 182, 279, 286, 307–8,319, 322, 350, 378, 400, 412–13; Volga crossing and 71st Special Service Coy, 190–91 NKVD troops, 38, 79, 88, 106, 110, 167; 10th NKVD Riɻe Div., 75, 109, 128, 131–3, 159–60, 174, 385 NKVD Special Detachments (later SMERSH) xiii, 79, 86, 168–9, 172–3, 199–200, 213 SMERSH, 26, 80, 186, 288 Frontier Troops, 18, 25, 41 National Committee for Free Germany, 422f, 425f Niemeyer, Lieutenant-Colonel, 227, 366 Nizhne-Chirskaya, 177–8, 254, 263, 267–9, 293, 295 Novocherkassk, 274, 294, 301,316, 341

Operation Barbarossa, 3–6, 8ʃ, 12–14, 16, 18, 20, 33, 53f, 68, 75, 77 Operation Blue, 63, 64, 69–74, 77–8; rewritten, 80, 124 Operation Fridericus, 65, 70–71 Operation Northern Light, 63 Operation Ring, 321f, 353–62 Operation Saturn, 292–3, 299; ‘Little Saturn’, 299, 310, 398 Operation Thunderclap, 296, 299, 309 Operation Torch, 214, 229f Operation Typhoon, 33, 40 Operation Uranus, 130–31, 179; planning and preparation, 220–23, 225–8, 230, 232–5; execution, 236–63; eʃect, 281, 292, 398 Operation Winter Storm, 296–300, 309 opolchentsy (militia), 28, 35 Order No. 227, 84–5, 97, 144 Order No. 270, 84, 169, 172 Orel, 34, 72 Organisation Todt, 255, 340 Oster, General Achim, 431

Paulus, Field Marshal Friedrich, 17, 33, 35, 40, 51–54; takes over Sixth Army, 61, 65, 67; and Stalingrad, 103, 113, 119, 129f, 140, 145–6, 183, 191, 210, 216, 218; and Uranus, 228, 245, 247, 251, 253; and encirclement, 227, 267–9, 271–2, 275–7, 299, 302, 308–9, 314f, 317ʃ, 320, 324n, 342–3; and last resistance, 360, 366, 370, 377, 380, 381–2; and Schmidt’s inɻuence, 379, 382f, 388n, 422; after surrender, 387f, 389–91, 396f, 400, 403; and fate of sons, 427; imprisonment, 422, 427f, 431 Paulus, Elena, 53, 314, 427f Pavlov, General D. G., 21, 25 Pavlov, Sergeant Jakob, 198 Perelazovsky, 232, 242, 252, 267 Peskovatka, 247, 258–9 Pickert, General Wolfgang, 267–8 Pieck, Wilhelm, 407 Pitomnik airɹeld, 281, 304, 334f, 338, 340, 343, 346, 357ʃ, 360, 361–2, 363f Pfeʃer, General, 62, 65, 381,382, 426 Plievier, Theodor, 377 Political department see Commissars Poltava, 2, 52f, 69, 74 Rastenburg, Wolfsschanze HQ, 44, 63, 79, 129, 267, 270, 272, 297, 316, 343–7, 391,393 Rattenhuber, Hans, 80 Raus, General Erhard, 296f, 301–2 Red Army: Armies: 1st Guards, 118; 2nd Guards, 293, 298f, 309; 3rd Guards, 300f; 1st Shock, 41–2; 2nd Shock, 44; 5th Tank Army, 227f, 230, 241, 245, 252, 296; 4th Army, 19; 6th Army, 67, 300; 16th Army, 41; 21st Army, 203, 252, 325, 355, 357, 359, 377; 24th Army, 118, 243, 323; 28th Army, 147; 51st Army, 85, 147f, 169, 172, 211, 223, 243, 248, 298; 57th Army, 67, 147f, 211f, 223, 243, 248, 278, 298, 310, 321, 359; 62nd Army, 90f, 96, 114, 118, 125–6, 128–9, 136, 144, 147, 154, 157, 190, 192, 196, 201,

212, 216, 243, 247, 264, 302–3, 359, 377, 394, 431; 64th Army, 90f, 114f, 118, 125, 147, 169, 186, 197, 202f, 211,223, 248f, 355, 359; 65th Army, 251, 257,353,355,357,359, 370; 66th Army, 243, 355 Corps: 3rd Guards Cavalry, 241, 251, 253f; 4th Cavalry, 227, 232, 248, 297; 8th Cavalry, 241, 252; 1st Tank, 246, 252; 4th Tank, 227, 241, 244, 246, 251, 253, 256; 13th Tank, 298, 356; 16th Tank, 259; 24th Tank, 300–301; 26th Tank, 246, 252, 255f; 4th Mechanized, 227, 248, 250, 254, 256, 298; 13th Mechanized, 227, 248, 250 Divisions: 13th Guards Riɻe, 131–2, 133–5, 138, 140–41, 150, 163, 171, 198, 204, 215,

377; 15th Guards Riɻe, 168; 33rd Guards Riɻe, 91–2; 35th Guards Riɻe, 138f; 36th Guards Riɻe, 356; 37th Guards Riɻe, 177, 191, 193f, 195–6; 38th Guards Riɻe, 186; 39th Guards Riɻe, 163, 189; 1st Riɻe, 113; 38th Riɻe, 170–71; 45th Riɻe, 168–9, 212–13, 64th Riɻe, 116; 93rd Riɻe, 232; 95th Riɻe, 138, 161f, 196, 205, 216; 96th Riɻe, 325; 112th Riɻe, 136, 190, 193, 195, 196–7; 138th Riɻe, 196, 216; 157th Riɻe, 249; 173rd Riɻe, 233, 320; 181st Riɻe, 96; 193rd Riɻe, 164, 189; 196th Riɻe, 170f; 204th Riɻe, 169, 172; 214th Riɻe, 115, 157; 221st Riɻe, 222; 245th Riɻe, 201; 248th Riɻe, 213; 284th Riɻe, 142–3, 150, 154, 170, 203; 302nd Riɻe, 169; 308th Riɻe, 187–8; 347th Riɻe, 215; 422nd Riɻe, 356; 81st Cavalry, 232, 297 Red Army Aviation, 92–3, 110; 8th Air Army, 133, 138, 162, 195 Red October metalworks, 161, 163, 187, 189, 198, 204, 211f, 217, 303, 377 Reichel, Major Joachim, 71–2, 73 Reichenau, Field Marshal Walter von, 16, 22, 35, 47, 52, 53–4; Reichenau order, 16, 53, 55, 56–57 Renoldi, General Dr Otto, 304, 315, 377 Reuber, Dr Kurt, 256, 283f, 312, 348, 421 Ribbentrop, Joachim von, 4, 6–8, 214 Richthofen, General Baron W. von, 69, 96, 103–5, 113, 119, 216, 230, 233, 244, 246–7, 270, 292, 334, 360 Rodenburg, General Carl, 423, 426, 430 Rodimtsev, General A. I., 106, 131–2, 134–5, 138, 141, 163 Rodin, General A. G., 246, 252, 255 Rogatin, General, 132–3, 190f, 303 Rokossovsky, Marshal Κ. K., 23, 39, 106, 225, 298, 320–2, 324, 353, 365, 388, 396 Romanenko, General P. L., 241, 245, 296 Romanian armed forces, 20, 83, 87, 183–4; in Kessel, 319, 355, 365, 377, 386 Third Army, 81, 184, 225, 226, 229, 230, 233–4, 239, 247, 252f Fourth Army, 81, 147, 232, 248–9, 250 Divisions: 1st Panzer, 231,245, 252; 1st Cavalry, 239, 244; 6th Cavalry, 250; 1st Inf., 183, 211; 2nd Inf., 211; 5th Inf., 183; 13th Inf., 241, 244; 20th Inf., 211, 248 Rommel, Field Marshal Erwin, 53, 81 Roosevelt, Franklin D., 402, 419 Roske, General, 377–8 Rostov-on-Don, 2, 51, 75, 77, 79, 84, 125, 293 Rundstedt, Field Marshal Gerd von, 20, 29, 31, 51–2, 53, 81, 369, 425 Rynok, 107, 114, 116, 147, 167, 212, 247,346

Salsk airɹeld, 295, 334f Sanne, General, 382 Saratov, 2, 226 Sarayev, Colonel A. A., 109, 132–3 Sarpa, lake, 113, 147, 243, 248 Schlömer, General, 377, 396f, 405, 426 Schmidt, General Arthur, 62, 228f, 239f, 251, 253; and encirclement, 267–9, 271, 299, 320, 324n; and surrender, 377, 379, 382f, 387f; after surrender, 397, 422, 430f Schmundt, General Rudolf, 267, 272, 345, 366, 425 Schulenberg, Count F. W. von der, 5, 9 Secret Field Police, 14, 60, 177, 263, 384, 428 Selle, Colonel Herbert, 276 Seraɹmovich, 226 Sevastopol, 2, 9, 61, 70, 75, 133, 253 Seydlitz-Kurzbach, General Walther von, 44, 63–4, 95, 102, 113, 117, 130, 145, 216, 218, 247, 269, 271–2,316,381,396, 398, 423ʃ, 426, 429ʃ Shakhty, 88, 335 Shcherbakov, Aleksandr, xiii–xiv, 37f, 114, 143, 159, 186, 202, 204, 216, 425f Shumilov, General Mikhail, 106, 383, 389, 398 Simonov, Konstantin, 91, 125–6, 156, 158n, 167, 176 SMERSH see NKVD Smyslov, Major Aleksandr, 322–30, 379 Smolensk, 28, 33, 47, 273 ‘Sniperism’, 203–5, 285–6 Sodenstern, General Georg von, 244, 267 Sorge, Richard, 37 Soviet citizens in German uniform see ‘Hiwis’ Spartakovka, 109,126, 190, 211, 271 Speer, Albert, 335f, 359 SS SD-Einsatzkommandos, Sonderkommando 4a, 15, 55–6, 177–8 Waʃen SS divisions: Leibstandarte, 52, 81, 352; Das Reich, 36f; Wiking, 79 Stahlberg, Lieutenant Alexander, 14–15, 273f, 341, 368 Stalin, Josef Vissarionovich, 4ʃ, 8f, 21, 27, 29, 45, 66, 72; purge of Red Army, 23; and Stavka, 24; and son Yakov, 26; and Moscow, 38–9, 42; and generals, 88–9, 99, 221–2, 233, 250n, 301, 321–2, 405; and defence of Stalingrad, 109, 117–18, 130, 137–8, 173, 191. 197; and Uranus, 130–31, 220–22, 233–4, 240; and Saturn, 292–3, 298, 301; and crushing of Kessel, 320f, 385; after surrender, 397, 404; and Tehran conference, 418–19 Stalin, Major Vasily, 133 Stalingrad tractor factory, 10, 98, 109, 161, 189, 191f, 195f, 206, 392 Stamenov, Ivan, 9 Stauʃenberg, Colonel Claus Count von, 67–8, 275n Stavka (Soviet Supreme General Staʃ), 24f, 34f, 42, 63, 74, 79, 84, 220–21, 292, 320, 328,

389 Stempel, General, 377, 381 Stock, Lieutenant Gerhard, 229, 239 Strachwitz, Lieutenant-Colonel Hyazinth Count von, 66f, 107, 109, 124 Strecker, General Karl, 58, 76, 87, 113, 146f, 149, 195, 229, 244, 246, 251, 254, 269,290,

308,313, 318–19, 339, 357,366, 392–3, 423, 426, 428, 430 Stülpnagel, General Otto von, 369 Surkov, Alexey, 125, 289 Suzdal camp, 415, 422 Taganrog, 2, 294, 343, 360 Tanashchinshin, Colonel, 250 Tatsinskaya airɹeld, 295, 300,313, 334 Tehran conference, 418–19 Telegin, General Konstantin F., 388, 389n Thomas, General, 424 Thunert, Colonel, 261 Timoshenko, Marshal Semyon, 42, 51f, 59, 61, 63, 65–6, 67, 74f, 99 Tresckow, Colonel Henning von, 14–15, 273, 275n Tukhachevsky, Marshal M., 23 Tula, 2, 36, 90

Ukrainians in German uniform, 179, 185–6, 263 Ulbricht, Walter, 307, 322, 407, 410, 426 Uman, 29, 31 Univermag, 140, 377, 383 Ural mountains, 9, 224 United States Embassy, Moscow, 137

Vasilevsky, Marshal Aleksandr, 84–5, 99, 117–18, 131, 220–23, 233f, 250n, 293, 298 Vatutin, General Nikolay, 182, 225 Vertyachy, 102, 243, 247, 257f Vinnitsa, Werwolf HQ, 79–80, 123, 129, 220 Vinogradov, General I. V., 281, 321, 322–3, 324–5,330 Vishnevsky, Colonel Timofey, 155 Vitebsk, 26, 266 Vlasov, General Andrey, 44 Voikovo camp, 422f Volchansk, 64, 65, 70 Volga, river, 2, 11f, 36, 70, 75, 81, 97f, 100–101, 106f, 110–11, 126, 127f, 152, 159–60; crossing of 13th Guards Div, 133–5; central landing stage, 141; civilian evacuation across, 174–5; crossing and NKVD control, 190–91; Hitler’s boasts, 213; Volga becomes unnavigable, 214, 217; frozen solid, 302–3 Volga ɻotilla, 134, 160, 162, 212, 214, 394 Volsky, General Vasily Timofeyevich, 250, 255, 437 Vorkhuta camps, 428 Voronezh, 2, 70, 74–5, 78, 129, 293 Voronov, Marshal Nikolay, 106, 233, 320ʃ, 323f, 349, 353, 360, 382, 388–91,396 Voroponovo, 178, 315, 346, 350–51 Voroshilov, Marshal Kliment, 23, 234, 418

Warlimont, General Walther, 123–4 Weichs, General Baron Maximilien von, 129, 247, 274, 425 Weinert, Erich, 307f 324, 350, 356, 362, 371, 407, 410, 426 Weizsacker, Baron Ernst von, 3 Werth, Alexander, 393, 397 White Rose group, 403 Wietersheim, General Gustav von, 102, 112f Witzleben, Field Marshal Erwin von, 56, 426 women in Red Army, 66, 87, 91, 96, 106–8, 109f, 140–41, 154, 157–8, 160, 207, 224

Yakimovich, Colonel, 388, 396 Yelabuga camp, 415, 421 Yeremenko, General Andrei Ivanovich, 34, 99–100, 108, 112, 115, 125, 127, 130f, 138, 147, 189, 196, 230, 255, 298f, 321–2

Zaitsev, Vasily, 154, 203–4 Zavarykino (Don Front HQ), 320f, 387, 397f Zeitzler, General Kurt 266, 270, 297,313, 320, 335, 357, 365, 391–2, 401 Zholudev, General V., 193f, 196 Zhukov, Marshal Georgy, 25, 35, 39, 42, 89, 117–18; at Khalkin-Gol, 24; and Order No. 227, 85

OceanofPDF.com ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Antony Beevor was educated at Winchester and Sandhurst. A regular oɽcer in the 11th Hussras, he served in Germany and England. He has published several novels, while his works of nonɹction include The Spanish Civil War; Crete: The Battle and the Resistance, which won the 1993 Runciman Award; and Berlin: The Downfall, 1945. With his wife, the writer Artemis Cooper, he wrote Paris After the Liberation: 1944-1949. Antony Beevor is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature and a Chevalier de l’Ordre des Arts et des Lettres in France. Most of his titles are published by Penguin.

Stalingrad was awarded the Samuel Johnson Proze for Non-ɹction, the Wolfson History Prize and the Hawthornden Prize in 1999. It became a number-one bestseller both in hardback and paperback, the UK edition alone selling half a million copies, and has been published around the world in eighteen translations.

OceanofPDF.com *

Hitler had his revenge in the end. Schulenburg, chosen in 1944 by the July plotters as their Foreign Minister after the planned assassination at Rastenburg, was hanged by the Nazis on 10 November of that year.

OceanofPDF.com *

‘I do not understand,’ a Red Army intelligence oɽcer has written at the bottom of the translation. ‘Where does this come from?’

OceanofPDF.com *

There were other echoes of the Spanish Civil War. Rubén Ruiz Ibarruri, the son of La Pasionaria, was killed commanding a machine-gun company of 35th Guards Riɻe Division south of Kotluban. Four subsequent Marshals of the Soviet Union closely linked to the battle of Stalingrad – Voronov, Malinovsky, Rokossovsky and Rodimtsev – had been Soviet advisers in Spain, as had General Shumilov, the commander of 64th Army. Voronov had directed the Republican artillery during the siege of Madrid against Franco’s Army of Africa. *

Few members of the Sixth Army seem to have heard about the Sarmatae of the lower Volga – an interbreed of Scythians and Amazons, according to Herodotus – who allowed their women to take part in war.

OceanofPDF.com *

There can be little doubt that the ‘violation’ propaganda in the late summer of 1942 contributed signiɹcantly to the mass rape committed by the Red Army on its advance into German territory in late 1944 and 1945. *

Two other sons of Soviet leaders, Vladimir Mikoyan and Leonid Khrushchev, served in Red Army aviation at Stalingrad. Vasily Stalin, who was much more of a playboy, soon escaped combat duties to make a propaganda ɹlm about the air force. OceanofPDF.com *

The list of nicknames and slang is almost endless. Bullets were ‘sunɻower seeds’ and mines were ‘gherkins’. A ‘tongue’ was an enemy sentry captured for interrogation purposes. *

Apart from one well-known member of a tank crew, Yekaterina Petlyuk, very few women served as combat soldiers in the city. In the air armies supporting Stalingrad Front, however, there was a women’s bomber regiment led by the famous aviator, Marina Raskova. ‘I had never seen her close to,’ Simonov wrote in his diary after meeting her at the Kamyshin aerodrome, ‘and I did not realize that she was so young and so beautiful. Maybe I remember it so well because soon afterwards I heard that she was killed.’

OceanofPDF.com *

Some 270,000 Ukrainians had already been recruited from prison camps by 31 January 1942. Others were civilian volunteers. The Stadtkommandantur in Stalingrad, according to one NKVD report, had 800 armed and uniformed Ukrainian youths for sentry and escort duty.

OceanofPDF.com *

Grossman seems to have been going through a period of spiritual idealization, seeing the Red Army soldier in quasi-Tolstoyan terms. ‘In war,’ he wrote in another notebook, ‘the Russian man puts a white shirt on his soul. He lives sinfully, but he dies like a saint. At the front, the thoughts and souls of many men are pure and there is even a monk-like modesty.’

OceanofPDF.com *

Jaundice was recorded separately. ‘Jaundice especially predominates here,’ wrote one oɽcer. ‘And since jaundice means a ticket home, everybody is longing to get it.’ There do not appear to be any recorded examples of soldiers eating picric acid from shells, to make them turn yellow, as in the First World War.

OceanofPDF.com *

Intelligence could be a dangerous branch in which to serve. On 22 November, three days after the great oʃensive began, the head of intelligence of 62nd Army was charged with ‘defeatism and counter-revolutionary ideas’ and accused of giving false information about the enemy. It is impossible to know whether the oɽcer in question was being held responsible for political crimes or incompetence, either his own or as a scapegoat for a superior.

OceanofPDF.com *

Volsky was already in almost everybody’s bad books. Just before the attack, he had written a personal letter to Stalin, ‘as an honest Communist’, warning that the oʃensive would fail. Both Zhukov and Vasilevsky had had to ɻy back to Moscow on 17 November. After hearing their arguments, Stalin telephoned Volsky from the Kremlin. He retracted his letter. Stalin was curiously unruʀed. The possibility cannot be ruled out that this was a precautionary ploy to be used by Stalin against Zhukov and Vasilevsky in case Operation Uranus failed.

OceanofPDF.com *

. Hitler, they thought, could be persuaded to step down as commander-in-chief by senior oɽcers. A change of regime might then be accomplished without the disastrous chaos and mutiny of November 1918. This was an astonishingly naive reading of Hitler’s character. The slightest opposition was more likely to trigger a fearful bloodbath. It was the younger ones, such as Tresckow and Stauʃenberg, who recognized that Hitler could be removed only by assassination.

OceanofPDF.com *

The ɹgures given at the time and in recent accounts range widely, sometimes without deɹning the nationalities involved. The most signiɹcant discrepancy is between the 51,700 Hiwis reported with divisions in mid-November, and the 20,300 listed in Sixth Army ration returns on 6 December. It is hard to know whether this was due to heavy casualties, Hiwis taking the opportunity to escape during the retreats of late November, or Russians being covertly incorporated into divisional ɹghting strengths. See Appendix B for more detail.

OceanofPDF.com *

General Doctor Renoldi took more interest later. From his railway carriage, he rather chillingly described the collapse of soldiers’ health in the Kessel as ‘a large-scale experiment into the eʃects of hunger’.

OceanofPDF.com *

Paulus later claimed that he had never issued an order to open ɹre on any Russian ɻag of truce, but Schmidt might well have done.

OceanofPDF.com *

The examples published in an anonymous collection entitled Last Letters from Stalingrad, which had a powerful emotional eʃect when published in 1954, are now considered forgeries.

OceanofPDF.com *

Winrich Behr, who knew Schmidt well, thinks this use of du highly unlikely although he considered that ‘there is no doubt that General Schmidt built up a strong inɻuence over Paulus’. *

Karmen’s photograph was doctored in Moscow. General Telegin was removed from the print because Stalin considered him insuɽciently important for such a historic occasion. (Even Dyatlenko’s promotion to major was accelerated for the release of the photograph.) This incident developed into one of those grotesque farces of the Stalinist era. When the photograph appeared across the front of Pravda, with his face removed, Telegin was terriɹed that someone had denounced him for a chance remark. Nothing happened, however, so he thought he was safe, but then, in 1948, he was suddenly arrested on the orders of Abakumov (the head of SMERSH) for no apparent reason.

OceanofPDF.com *

German guards were also used in other camps. The worst were some two hundred Germans (most appear to have been Saxons for some reason) who had deserted from punishment battalions. Armed with wooden clubs, and granted the designation of ‘Fighters against Fascism’, they refused to allow soldiers to fall out to relieve themselves during rollcall, even though the overwhelming majority were suʃering from dysentery.

OceanofPDF.com *

It is, of course, possible that General von Seydlitz secretly saw this operation as a chance of tricking the Soviets into sending him and thousands of Sixth Army prisoners home. But if this had been the case, one would have expected him to mention the episode after the war when he faced such heavy condemnation from former colleagues for having collaborated with Stalin’s regime.

OceanofPDF.com *

This collection is listed under ɹction as the authenticity of the letters is very much in doubt.

OceanofPDF.com